---
layout: dip
nr: 1
title: DIP Template
version: 3
status: Draft
created: 2009-07-07
last-modified: --
author: Leandro Lucarella
permalink: /DIP1
---

Abstract
--------

This is a sample template to easily start a new DIP. DIPs can be fairly
informal for now, but at least the leading metadata should be included,
and a short abstract.

Rationale
---------

Keeping track of improvement proposals is very hard and not well
documented organized. Having a template (and a process) for such
proposals can improve the situation significantly.

Description
-----------

A DIP is a D Improvement Proposal, a way propose changes to the language
in a sightly more formal way than just throwing out the idea in the news
group. A DIP should have an structure similar to this one, but nothing
is set in stone, you can add or remove sections and/or metadata as long
as the DIP is both clean and complete, but try to stick to this template
as a bare minimum unless is really necessary to remove something.

A DIP should represent a problem the community wants to resolve and not
just a specific resolution to a problem. This allows the DIP to be a
central hub for any given problem. If a resolution is radically
different from the current state of the DIP, an alternative DIP could be
created as a sub page, e.g. under /DIP1/Alternatives/Alt1. The DIP
should be created in its entirety such that it could replace the current
DIP through simple copy and past.

Usage
-----

To start a new DIP you can go to Edit link and copy the source of this
DIP, then go to [DIP index](DIPs "wikilink") and add a new item in the
list. The DIP number should be one more than the last DIP in the index
(for example, if the DIP1 is the last DIP, your DIP should be DIP2). The
link in the index should have the form: \[\[DIPx\]\], Title, Status,
resume. Where x is the DIP number, title is the DIP title and resume is
a short description about the DIP.

Save the [DIP index](DIPs "wikilink") page and click on the new red
link. Now you are editing the new DIP you just created, now paste the
copied source text from this template and replace all the you need.

Remember to update the metadata at the start of the DIP, and keep it as
a Draft at the beginning. When your DIP is done, you should announce it
in the News Group for discussion, with a subject like this: new DIPx:
title (where one more time x is the DIP number and title is the DIP
title).

You should always put you DIPs in the Public Domain (or a similarly
permissive license but use Public Domain unless you're very sure of what
you're doing).

Recommendations
---------------

When writing a DIP, try not to express your opinion. DIPs should provide
facts and be as objective as possible. Even when that's pretty hard, you
can make the DIP look more objective by not using, for example, "I
prefer XXX because YYY". If YYY is an objective advantage, write that in
a more objective way, like "XXX can be a better option because YYY". Try
to leave non-technical personal preferences aside; "XXX can be a better
option because the syntax is nicer" is not good enough even when you
don't say "I prefer".

Try not to include half-baked ideas. If you are not sure about
something, leave it outside the DIP and write it on the NG announcement
instead for further discussion. The idea can be added to the DIP in the
future when it is in a better shape.

Abstract
--------

Make the abstract as descriptive as possible (while keeping it brief).
From an abstract you should be able to tell what the DIP is about, you
should introduce for every non-trivial concept a person should know for
understanding the DIP (or provide links if you can't briefly describe
those concepts in the abstract). Don't copy the title of the DIP to use
it as an abstract. Ideally an abstract should be a paragraph 5 to 10
lines long.

Rationale
---------

Rationale should be complete. When the DIP tries to solve a problem, try
to describe that problem as detailed as possible. If you have links to
the NG describing the problem more deeply, used them. All the background
information is welcome.

NG Announcement
---------------

When posting the DIP announcement to the NG, please copy the abstract,
so people can easily know what is it about and follow the link if they
are interested.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
