---
layout: dip
nr: 11
title: Automatic downloading of imports
dip: 11
version: 2
status: Draft
created: 2011-6-14
last-modified: 2010-6-15
author: Andrei Alexandrescu (andrei at erdani dot com), Steven Schveighoffer (schveiguy at yahoo dot com)
permalink: /DIP11
---

Summary
-------

Currently there is no systematic way of specifying and loading of remote
libraries. This proposal adds compiler features and a tool that allows
the compiler to automatically download and install import files on an
as-needed basis.

Scope
-----

We hope that this feature will enable painless, simple building of
programs with interdependent remote libraries. There would be no need
for the user to specifically download files, expand archives, etc.

The proposed system does not impose versioning policy; instead, it
allows code to enact it in URL structure.

Currently the system is intended for source libraries only. Future
additions should address binary distributions.

Import Path Update / URL specification
--------------------------------------

Required DIP: 
 - "DIP13": DIP13 "wikilink") (import path binding

The import path spec is changed to:

`   [module.or.package=]`<path-or-url>

If the import path is specified as a url, dmd will attempt to get the
file via the method specified in the url prefix (e.g. <http://>) The
mechanism for accessing this path may be delegated to a helper tool (see
below).

Impact
------

Urls conflict with the path list separator on POSIX ':'. Currently it is
possible to use -I/path/foo:/path/bar. This should vanish on all
platforms and can easily be replaced with -I/path/foo -I/path/bar.

Language feature
----------------

A new pragma "importpath" is introduced:

`   pragma(importpath, "`<import_path>`");`

This means, when compiling this file (and this file only), assume
-I<import_path> was passed to the compiler before any other paths. If
this file imports another file, the pragma does not apply for the
imported file's imports.

There is an alternative proposal [DIP14](DIP14 "wikilink") to provide
better language integration.

Trust model
-----------

The user trusts the paths given on the command line (including URLs) or
in config files, or as pragmas inside the source code.

`   dmd -Ihttp://a.com -Ihttp://b.org ...`

means that the user allows downloading any D code from a.com and b.org
during compilation.

No provisions are currently made for a user running the compiler on an
already compromised machine (e.g. compiler, DNS server, system
libraries).

Possible security by signed hashes
----------------------------------

By providing hashes (e.g. SHA1, SHA256 or even multiple hashes of
different kinds for redundancy) of the files that are signed by the lib
developer with his GPG key, compromised files could easily be detected
(as long as the lib developers private GPG is not on the compromised
server or otherwise leaked).

However this implies that the user needs to either specify the
developers GPG key (or something that identifies it) with the pragma for
obtaining the lib or maintain a keyring of all trusted developers, else
anyone can sign the code with his own GPG key.

The syntax for this has not been decided, or whether this will be
included.

Using Package qualifier to specify package
------------------------------------------

With the include path specified as
acme.widgets=<http://acme.com/dlibs/widgets> either via -I on the
command line or via a pragma(importpath, ...) statement inside a source
file, if subsequently this import is seen:

`   import acme.widgets.square; `

then, "<http://acme.com/dlibs/widgets/square.di>" and then
"<http://acme.com/dlibs/widgets/square.d>" are attempted for download.
If either of these fails, an error is generated (no other paths are
tried).

Note that this applies for sub-packages too, i.e. all packages and
modules having acme.widgets as a prefix will be looked up starting from
URL "<http://acme.com/dlibs/widgets>" and adding slashes appropriately
as dots are found in the imported alias. For example:

`   import acme.widgets.enhanced.posix.circle; `

will search URL "<http://acme.com/dlibs/widgets/enhanced/posix/>" for
files "circle.di" and then "circle.d". If neither is found, an error is
generated.

Using Package qualifier to specify module
-----------------------------------------

With the path specified above, if subsequently this import is seen:

`   import acme.widgets; `

then "<http://acme.com/dlibs/widgets>" is attempted for download (no d
or .di is added). If this fails, an error is generated. Note that the
download helper tool (see below) implements these features.

Transitivity and Conflict Resolution
------------------------------------

A downloaded module may specify its own pragma(importpath, ...), which
will be honored during compilation of that module (either during import
or standalone).

If two import paths specify the same alias, they are in conflict unless
the mapped URLs are identical. Example:

`  // module 1`
`  pragma(importpath, "acme.widgets=`[`http://acme.com/widgets/v1.0`](http://acme.com/widgets/v1.0)`");`
`  // module 2`
`  pragma(importpath, "acme.widgets=`[`http://acme.com/widgets/v2.3`](http://acme.com/widgets/v2.3)`");`

This is in order to avoid dependencies on two versions of the same
library/file. Note that this only applies when compiling multiple
modules in the same compiler invocation. If these files are compiled
separately, and they do not import each other, the compiler cannot
detect the conflict and will not error.

Linking
-------

Although dmd does download remote modules, it will otherwise treat them
like regular files, so it will issue linker errors unless the downloaded
modules are also added to the build. However, in conjunction with an
appropriate download protocol and pragma(lib, ...), the imported source
can implement downloading of a compiled version of the file for linking.
Using rdmd in conjunction to this feature will enable seamless builds
with remote components.

\_\_FILE\_\_
------------

In a downloaded module, \_\_FILE\_\_ will correspond to the url used to
download the module.

External Import Tool
--------------------

In order to facilitate downloading of modules in an extensible way
without impacting the compiler source, the compiler may rely on an
external tool to acquire the import. The tool path may be specified on
the command line or in the configuration file. It's API will be as
follows:

`   tool -Iurl [modulename]`

Note that modulename will not include the package qualifier. For
example, if the import path is specified as:

`   -Iacme.widgets=`[`http://acme.com/widgets`](http://acme.com/widgets)

And a file imports acme.widgets.square, the following command will be
executed:

`   tool -Ihttp://acme.com/widgets square`

If the package qualifier encompasses the entire import (i.e. import
acme.widgets), then the command line is:

`   tool -Ihttp://acme.com/widgets .`

If the tool finds the file, it will output the following:

`   url-resolved:`<file-contents>

where url-resolved is the exact url used to download the module (to be
used as \_\_FILE\_\_ per above) and return 0.

if the file cannot be found, it will output nothing, and return
non-zero, which will cause the compiler to generate an error.

It is important to note that the compiler will try paths in order
specified, which means a module could be in a local path, but an earlier
path specification contains a remote url, the remote url will be tried
before the local paths. That is, the additional abilities to specify
remote paths does not affect how the compiler searches the import path.

Caching
-------

To prevent re-fetching source files that likely are very static, the
download tool can cache the files fetched using urls for future use. If
any file changes remotely, the user will have to clear the cache, or if
it can detect the changes easily, it can purge the cache without
assistance.

The method of caching is not specified, nor is whether the tool should
cache the absence of a file.

Packaging
---------

It is strongly advised that a specific package system be used for
downloading both import source and compiled library for a given package.
This allows one to easily specfiy pragma(lib) in the downloaded source
to automatically link the file. The tool may have to edit the file used
to link in the source file downloaded, as the linker is not going to be
instrumented to know where to find the library.

Protocols
---------

This proposal only specifies that http be a possible protocol used by
this tool. However, other protocols may be used as long as they can be
specified in url form and the download tool can support them.

Alternatives
------------

This arguably extralinguistic feature could be addressed by a tool
included with the standard distribution. The tool would use traditional
package and library management, along with installing additional files,
running installation scripts, etc. Alternatively, a general OS-specific
package management can be used.

This proposal does not aim at obviating all needs for such a tool, but
instead it tries to (a) lower the barrier of entry for common code
sharing scenarios, (b) allow self-contained, headache-free libraries,
and (c) help and simplify construction of larger-scale tools.

It is worth noting that the compiler is the only tool that has exact
knowledge and control over what modules are being imported. An external
tool would need to maintain package description files in separation from
the source code, or at best could run the compiler multiple times and
incrementally download libraries as they are required. For such an
approach refer to [Adam Ruppe's
message](http://www.digitalmars.com/pnews/read.php?server=news.digitalmars.com&group=digitalmars.D&artnum=138556).
His program is significantly slower than a compiler-integrated approach.

It's also possible to put the download tool code directly in the
compiler, but this has several drawbacks:

-   The compiler is written in C++, so this tool would also have to be.
-   The compiler arguably should not be "infiltrated" by code that has
    nothing to do with compiling.
-   There are already boatloads of programs/libraries that solve the
    problem of downloading files, we shouldn't be reinventing the
    wheel here.
-   Adding a method for downloading does not require a rebuild of
    the compiler.
-   The benefit of having the compiler actually do the downloading is
    that there would be no need to start an extra process.
-   However, the performance impact should be quite minimal, especially
    with caching by the download tool.
