---
layout: dip
nr: 12
title: C API headers
dip: 12
version: 1
status: Approved
created: 2011-10-18
last-modified: 2011-10-18
author: Martin Nowak
permalink: /DIP12
---

Abstract
--------

Create a place to gather D import files for publicly available C
libraries.

Rationale
---------

D is binary compatible with C ABI code. This allows to reuse the huge
amount of high quality public C libraries. Providing a central place to
publish D import files can leverage the tedious work of translating.

Description
-----------

A repository was created under
[1](https://github.com/D-Programming-Language/deimos). It was proposed
to use the following directory structure.

`   deimos`
`   `
`       |--- library name`
`           |--- C`
`              |--- foo.h`
`                  |--- bar`
`                      |--- baz.h`
`           |--- D`
`              |--- foo.d`
`                  |--- bar`
`                      |--- baz.d`

Each '\#include &lt;path/to/header.h&gt;' should have a corresponding
'import path.to.header;'

Possibly all files could be rooted under a package 'cabi', i.e. 'import
cabi.path.to.header;'.

The D import files should try to do as least modifications as possible
to simplify updates of the C headers. This includes leaving comments
intact.

Translated header should not require linkage of any D binary. Necessary
D functions can be written as nullary templates.

`   #define GET(x) x.value => int GET()(X x) { return x.value; }`

Version tags should match the ones being used by the C headers.

The copyright for the D import files should match the one being used by
the C header as they are derived work.

If the C header file has a name that is a D keyword, an underscore will
be appended to the D module name.

If a C type name matches a C function name (stat), the type name will
have a "\_t" appended.

Open Questions
--------------

-   Who is going to maintain the repository?

Starting with the phobos dev team.

-   How will added/modified headers be reviewed/tested?


-   What can be reused of the dsource/bindings project?

Recommendations
---------------

Each library should contain a README in the root folder. The README file
should contain exact source and version of the C library. Furthermore it
should contain specific notes about the usage of the D import file.

Every library should contain a simple D example under
CAPI/library/examples. This could be used for basic self testing.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
