---
layout: dip
nr: 15
title: Import of packages
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2011-10-18
last-modified: 2011-10-18
author: Martin Nowak
permalink: /DIP15
---

Abstract
--------

Provide means to import a whole package.

Rationale
---------

A way of importing a package is proposed. This provides finer grained
control of organizing packages and submodules and simplifies their
usage. It will further allow to decouple a package's interface from it's
internal organization.

Description
-----------

An import that does not resolve to a D source file but to a directory
that has a \_.{d|di} file will be treated as a package import.

Given the following files.

root

:   |--- pkg

    :   |--- \_.d

`   module pkg._;`
`   `
`   public import pkg.a;`
`   public import pkg.b : bar;`
`   `
`   int b;`
`   `
`   static this()`
`   {`
`       b = 12;`
`   }`

:   

    :   |--- a.d

`   module pkg.a;`
`   `
`   void foo() {}`

:   

    :   |--- b.d

`   module pkg.b;`
`   `
`   void bar() {}`
`   void baz() {}`

The following behaviors are proposed.

Package import.

`   import pkg;`

`   auto a = b; // b is pkg._.b`
`   foo();      // foo is pkg.a.foo`
`   bar();      // bar is pkg.b.bar`
`   `
`   baz();        // error undefined identifier baz`
`   import pkg.b; // error pkg.b is int pkg._.b`
`   import pkg.a; // ok will import root/pkg/a.d`
`   `
`   // this is equivalent to`
`   import pkg._;`

Static package import.

`   static import pkg;`
`   `
`   auto a = pkg.b; // pkg.b is pkg._.b`
`   pkg.foo();      // pkg.foo is pkg.a.foo`
`   pkg.bar();      // pkg.bar is pkg.b.bar`
`   pkg.baz();      // error undefined identifier pkg.baz`
`   import pkg.b;   // error pkg.b is int pkg._.b`
`   import pkg.a;   // ok will import root/pkg/a.d`
`   `
`   // pkg is the package with merged in scope of pkg._`
`   // this has no direct equivalence but is roughly`
`   static import pkg = pkg._;`

Aliasing the package.

`   import util=pkg;`
`   `
`   auto a = util.b; // util.b is pkg._.b`
`   util.foo();      // util.foo is pkg.a.foo`
`   util.bar();      // util.bar is pkg.b.bar`
`   util.baz();      // error undefined identifier util.baz`
`   import pkg.b;    // ok will import root/pkg/b.d`
`   import util.a;   // ok will import root/pkg/a.d`
`   `
`   // util is the package pkg with merged in scope of pkg._`
`   // this has no direct equivalence but is roughly`
`   import util = pkg._;`

Qualified import of submodule.

`   import pkg.b; // will import root/pkg/b.d`
`   `
`   baz();        // baz is pkg.b.baz`
`   auto a = b;   // error undefined identifier b`

`   // this is equivalent to`
`   static import __hidden = pkg._;`
`   import pkg.b;`

Any of the these will execute the static initializer of pkg.\_.

Impact
------

The idiom of explicitly importing \_.d is already used. This will not
conflict with existing code as it is either an error now or doesn't
change the scope members.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
