---
layout: dip
nr: 16
title: Transparently substitute module with package
dip: 1
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2012-03-30
last-modified: 2012-03-30
author: Andrei Alexandrescu
permalink: /DIP16
---

Abstract
--------

This proposal allows a module to be replaced with a package, without
requiring changes to client code. It solves the problem of modules
growing too large to be conveniently managed as one file, yet with an
interface small enough. After the substitution users may continue using
the same import statement to use the package, or may import only parts
of it.

Rationale
---------

This is a "growing pains" kind of issue. Some modules in std (algorithm,
datetime) have grown large, which makes it difficult to manage them as
single files. Other libraries may be experiencing the same issue. This
proposal allows breaking a module into a package without breaking client
code that assumes the code is still in one module.

Description
-----------

-   If the compiler sees a request for importing "foo.bar" and "foo/bar"
    is a directory, then automatically look for the
    file "foo/bar/package.d". If both "foo/bar.d" and "foo/bar/" exists,
    compilation halts with an error.
-   ( One nice detail of the design is that "package" is a keyword so
    the file "foo/bar/package.d" cannot be imported otherwise by
    mistake, which improves the robustness of the scheme.
-   The file "foo/bar/package.d" will be processed like a normal import,
    except the file is not allowed to use the "module" declaration.
    Instead, the file is assumed to have a "module foo.bar"
    declaration, i.e. it is interpreted as if it were the
    module "foo.bar".
-   The file "foo/bar/package.d" will in all likelihood import whatever
    files in the package the developer decides.

This proposal comes with an important lookup rules change. When looking
up the symbol "foo.bar.baz", currently an exact match is needed.
However. when looking up ".baz" or simply "baz", a flexible lookup is
used that has many advantages (less verbose, hijacking detection etc).
Therefore we think similar flexibility should be imparted to
"foo.bar.baz", as follows:

-   If a qualified symbol "foo.bar.baz" appears in code, the compiler
    considers "foo.bar" a prefix that sets the starting point of the
    lookup, and then proceeds with looking up "baz" from that
    starting point. That means a program that imports std.algorithm may
    use "std.sort" for the symbol "std.algorithm.sort".
-   If more than one symbol is found, normal hijacking and collision
    rules apply.
-   This change in the lookup rule completes the proposal because it
    allows the code using "foo.bar.baz" to actually find
    "foo.bar.module13.baz", i.e. it supports transparently breaking
    modules into packages.

Usage
-----

No particular usage notes beyond the above.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
