---
layout: dip
nr: 17
title: Sane volatile statement
dip: 17
version: 1
status: Dropped
created: 2011-07-31
last-modified: 2011-07-31
author: Alex Rønne Petersen (alex (AT) lycus.org)
permalink: /DIP17
---

Abstract
--------

This document describes a refined volatile statement for the D
programming language. The new definition takes into account the needs of
low-level, embedded, kernel, and driver developers, etc. The idea is to
define volatile in such a way that it has strict, well-defined semantics
that programmers can rely on and which can easily be implemented in a D
compiler.

Rationale
---------

D currently has no way to do safe memory-mapped I/O. The reason for that
is that the language has no well-defined volatile statement or type
qualifier. This means that a compiler is free to reorder memory
operations as it sees fit and even erase some loads/stores that it
thinks are dead (but which have actual impact on program semantics).

While D could simply introduce a type qualifier akin to C's volatile,
this was decided against for this proposal. It would allow rather
nonsensical code such as:

`   void foo()`
`   {`
`       volatile int i;`
`   `
`       ...`
`   `
`       i = 42;`
`   }`

The volatile on the declaration of i has no effect, nor could it be
given any meaningful effect. Thus, volatile as a type qualifier was
deemed overengineered (especially in the light of the many qualifiers D
already has). Instead, in this proposal, a volatile statement is defined
using the already-in-place syntax which is currently deprecated.

Description
-----------

The volatile statement is very similar to the with statement, except
that it takes no 'argument': It introduces a new scope in the statement
(which can be a block) following it. Code within this statement is
protected from a number of problems that present themselves when a
compiler optimizes code that deals with things like memory-mapped I/O.

Grammar
-------

The grammar for a volatile statement shall be:

`   VolatileStatement:`
`   volatile ScopeStatement`

The existing statement grammar shall be expanded as such:

`   NonEmptyStatementNoCaseNoDefault:`
`       ...`
`       VolatileStatement`

This means that the following (silly) code is valid:

`   bool foo()`
`   {`
`       int* i = new int;`
`   `
`       volatile`
`           *i = 42;`
`      `
`       volatile`
`       {`
`           *i = 1;`
`           *i = 2;`
`           *i = 3;`
`       }`
`      `
`       volatile`
`       {`
`           *i = 42;`
`           `
`           volatile`
`           {`
`               return *i == 42;`
`           }`
`       }`
`   }`

Semantics
---------

All statements within a volatile statement are guaranteed to execute in
the \*\*exact\*\* order that they are written in, lexically, even if it
seems to the compiler that the statements could be reordered harmlessly
to achieve better performance.

For example, the compiler may not move \*\*any\*\* of the statements
here:

`   void foo()`
`   {`
`       int i;`

`       volatile`
`       {`
`           bar();`
`           i = 42;`
`           baz(i);`
`       }`
`   }`

Further, the compiler is not allowed to optimize out any statements,
even if they seem completely dead. For instance, in this example, the
compiler must not remove the first assignment even though it seems dead:

`   void foo()`
`   {`
`       int i;`

`       volatile`
`       {`
`           i = 1;`
`           i = 2;`
`       }`
`   }`
`   `

Lastly, volatile statements may not be reordered with regard to each
other. That is, in this example, the first volatile statement must not
be moved to after the second and vice versa:

`   void foo()`
`   {`
`       volatile`
`           bar();`

`       volatile`
`           baz();`
`   }`

Volatile statements may, however, be reordered with respect to
non-volatile statements. So, in the example below, the volatile
statement may be moved to the end of the function (after the call to
baz):

`   void foo()`
`   {`
`       int i;`

`       volatile`
`           bar(); // Notice that there is no dependency on i.`

`       i = 42;`
`       baz(i);`
`   }`

(Assuming, of course, that reordering the non-volatile code has no
visible effect on semantics.)

Just to be clear, volatile guarantees \*\*absolutely nothing\*\* about
concurrency.

Alternatives
------------

A number of alternatives to a volatile statement have been suggested.
They are, however, not good enough to actually replace a volatile
statement for the reasons outlined below.

### Shared qualifiers

The shared type qualifier has been suggested as a solution to the
problems volatile tries to solve. However:

-   It is not implemented in any compiler, so practically using it now
    is not possible at all.
-   It does not have any well-defined semantics yet.
-   It will most likely not be portable because it's designed for the
    x86 memory model.
-   If ever implemented, it will result in memory fences and/or atomic
    operations, which is \*\*not\*\* what volatile memory operations
    are about. This will severely affect pipelining and performance
    in general.

### Inline Assembly

It was suggested to use inline assembly to perform volatile memory
operations. While a correct solution, it is not reasonable:

-   It leads to unportable programs.
-   It leads to a dependency on the compiler's inline assembly syntax.
-   Some compilers may even decide to optimize the assembly itself.
-   Memory-mapped I/O is too common in low-level programming for a
    systems language to require the programmer to drop to assembly.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
