---
layout: dip
nr: 18
title: Non-GC threads
dip: 18
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2012-09-01
last-modified: 2012-09-01
author: Piotr Szturmaj
permalink: /DIP18
---

Abstract
--------

The proposal is to create a base for safe, non garbage-collected
threads. This is done by adding nogc attribute for functions. nogc
functions cannot perform operations that may allocate garbage collected
memory. They are covariant with gc ones.

Rationale
---------

Currently, all functions can use garbage collected memory. Threads that
call those functions must be managed by the garbage collector, which may
occasionally suspend them to perform collection. This can lead to
unwanted pauses, that are not acceptable in some situations, mainly
real-time audio/video processing, gaming, and others. Rather than
relying on particular (concurrent) implementation of the GC, or
resorting to unsafe solutions, a language-level guarantee is proposed.
Guarantee is that threads that spawn nogc functions will not be
suspended during their execution.

It's possible to create non-gc threads now, but current practices are
unsafe and error prone. For example, one must check the code of all
called functions to see if they don't perform GC allocations. In this
proposal, compiler guarantees that functions don't allocate GC memory.
This is similar to nothrow and pure handling. Compiler guarantees that
pure functions can't call impure ones, and nothrow functions can't call
throwing ones.

Description
-----------

Functions can be marked with nogc attribute, similarly to nothrow or
pure marking. Nogc functions can't perform operations listed here (D
Operations That Involve the Garbage Collector). That is, they can't do:

-   NewExpression
-   Array appending
-   Array concatenation
-   Array literals (except when used to initialize static data)
-   Associative array literals
-   Any insertion, removal, or lookups in an associative array
-   Extracting keys or values from an associative array
-   Taking the address of (i.e. making a delegate) a nested function
    that accesses variables in an outer scope
-   A function literal that access variables in an outer scope
-   An AssertExpression? that fails its condition

`   void func() nogc`
`   {`
`       auto ptr = malloc(4096); // ok`
`       auto instance = new SomeClass(); // Error: nogc functions can't allocate using new`
`   }`

Nogc functions are statically checked by the compiler. If at least one
of the operations listed above is used, this results in a compilation
error.

Functions not marked with nogc attribute are called "gc" functions. All
gc functions can call nongc functions, but nongc functions can't call gc
ones. This is analogous to pure and nothrow behavior. Compiler should
infer nogc attribute automatically for matching functions, while
explicit nogc attribute will force non-gc check on programmer's demand.

Nogc functions are handled differently when they're used to spawn
threads:

Newly created thread is not added to the GC's thread list. This way it's
never suspended. If some of the function's arguments take references
(directly or indirectly), then all of them are automatically added to
the list of GC roots (addRoot()). It is possible to mark entry-point
functions with nogc:

`   void main() nogc`
`   {`
`   }`

This way entire program is guaranteed to not use GC at all (given that
no static module constructors use GC). Code of the garbage collector
doesn't need to be linked, leading to smaller executables. This is also
useful for writing programs that run in constrained environments, for
example kernel-mode drivers or embedded/microcontroller software.

After all, users can benefit from proper modules, templates, clean
syntax and other nice features of D, without using garbage collector.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
