---
layout: dip
nr: 2
title: Const code bloat
version: 2
status: Approved
load: Design Details
created: 2009-07-09
last-modified: 2010-06-11
language: D2
breaks: Nothing (extension)
permalink: /DIP2
---

<div style="padding: 1ex 1ex; background: #ffd;">
Note: This page should be reviewed and updated to reflect the actual
syntax and use of 'auto ref'. This page has already been archived and
the version increased.

</div>
Abstract
--------

Enhancement to const design. This is a fix for [bug
1961](http://d.puremagic.com/issues/show_bug.cgi?id=1961).

Rationale
---------

Because of the current design of the const system, writing const-correct
code results in massive code duplication: each function returning a part
of its argument should be implemented for mutable, const and immutable
arguments. Templating is not always a solution because template
functions are not virtual.

In addition, it is currently impossible to safely mark a function as not
modifying its parameters, yet returning those parameters with the same
const contract that the caller has with the parameter.

Description
-----------

```d
class Book
{
    private Author xAuthor;
    Author author()
    {
        return xAuthor;
    }
}
```

If function author is declared mutable, it can be called only on mutable
instance of Book. If it's declared const then it can return only const
Author, and this is not right return type for mutable and immutable
instances of Book. The solution is to define three versions of the
function:

```d
class Book
{
    private Author xAuthor;
    Author author()
    {
        return xAuthor;
    }
    const(Author) author() const
    {
        return xAuthor;
    }
    immutable(Author) author() immutable
    {
        return xAuthor;
    }
}
```

Now everything works fine but at the cost of code duplication. In
addition, there is no way to mark the mutable version as not modifying
the Book instance *during function execution* without enforcing the
const contract onto the caller when it reads the author. For example, a
caller may want to get the author without having the accessor modify the
author (guaranteed by the compiler), and then modify the author through
the return value. This works fine with a field but not with a
function/property.

The enhancement involves introduction of new keyword for the fourth
const flavor. I'll use vconst for it.

```d
class Book
{
    private Author xAuthor;
    vconst(Author) author() vconst
    {
        return xAuthor;
    }
}
```

1.  It works just like const function in the sense that vconst data is
    readonly with the difference that constness of return type is that
    of passed arguments: mutable, const, immutable or vconst. This
    allows for vconst functions in interfaces.
2.  If function has two vconst parameters, best match is chosen: if
    arguments are of the same constness, their constness is chosen,
    otherwise vconst is deemed as const.
3.  In overload resolution definite constness is preferred over vconst.
    This allows to use variant of function with immutable optimization
    if you want it that badly. Though copying function is not necessary:
    this can be settled with a pragma or compiler switch, so that
    compiler will generate immutable variant for the
    function automatically.
4.  vconst is a subtype of const. When checking function body vconst is
    orthogonal to mutable and immutable (use vconst in function body for
    proper typechecking). Different case is when vconst function is
    called and compiler decides what constness should be imitated by
    vconst: it works more like template here rather than normal type
    modifier, it's illegal to cast immutable to vconst implicitly since
    vconst can mimic mutable, which depends on client code.
5.  There's only one instance of the function and only one entry for it
    in the vtable.
6.  Code generated for the function is identical to that of
    const function. The difference is semantical only and exists only
    in typesystem.

Usage
-----

```d
class Number
{
    int opCmp(in Number num2) const //no need for vconst
    {
            //some code
    }
}

//this function returns mutable value for mutable arguments, immutable value for immutable arguments and so on.
vconst(Number) min(vconst Number num1, vconst Number num2)
{
    const tnum=num1; //castable to const but this may be not what you want
    vconst tnum2=num2; //preserve constness, tnum2 can be returned by the function
    return num1<num2 ? num1 : num2;
}
```

Migration Notes
---------------

There is a class of functions that will benefit from migrating to vconst
like the min function in the [DIP2\#Usage](DIP2#Usage "wikilink")
section, but if these functions are not migrated, they may be not
callable from the migrated ones:

```d
const(Number) min(const Number num1, const Number num2)
{
    return num1<num2 ? num1 : num2;
}

vconst(Number) min3(vconst Number num1, vconst Number num2, vconst Number num3)
{
    return min(min(num1,num2),num3);
}
```

Although calling `min(min(num1,num2),num3)` is ok, you won't be able to
return the result.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
