---
layout: dip
nr: 21
title: DIP Template
dip: 21
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2012-11-19
last-modified: 2012-11-19
author: Adam D. Ruppe
permalink: /DIP21
---

Abstract
--------

If we make rewrite to a call, while leaving the rest the same, we fix
problems without creating new ones.

Rationale
---------

We want to keep existing code working as much as possible. Some code
uses the same function with and without parenthesis, especially with
UFCS. This is currently allowed, but can cause ambiguity with functions
returning a callable or a reference. Additionally, UFCS blur the
difference between setter and getter that implicit when using as show
below :

See some example below that are confusing ATM :

1.  is now equivalent to \[1, 2\]}}

2.  ... {{)}}}} it is now unclear what  does.

3.  ... {{)}}}} it is now unclear what  does.

4.  it is now unclear what  does.

5.  it is now unclear what  does.

Description
-----------

There's a fairly easy way to do this, thanks to the word:

1.  Any function without remains exactly the same as it is now. Parens
    are \*not\* required on them.
2.  Any function with is rewritten into a call immediately. Therefore,
    putting () is naturally an error or delegate call because of the
    return value.

-   }}

    -   rewritten into transparently

    -   since is already , this becomes  - an error because you cannot
        call an int like a function

The only potential for code breakage here is on stuff marked , which if
you have been marking it on semantic properties already (NOT on places
where you just wanted appease the -property switch's idiotic rules),
should be fine.

If in doubt, leave off. That leaves things exactly as they are.

Talk
----

On Tuesday, 20 November 2012 at 12:44:44 UTC, Jacob Carlborg wrote:

:   Should this be allowed for functions that isn't marked with
    @property: foo = 3;

Yes. We should \*only\* be changing the way @property is implemented.
(Namely, actually implementing it!)

Don't want to break existing code. The new changes must be opt in.

If there's both an @property setter and a regular function, the property
should be used here.

Generally, overloading on @property could be allowed.

If there isn't a setter, you don't change things.

If setter is present: foo = foo + 1; // becomes: foo(foo() + 1);

If setter is not present: foo = foo + 1; // becomes: foo() = foo() + 1;

If foo returns an rvalue, this is a natural error. If it returnsref, it
works fine.

:   I'm not sure how it fit in the DIP but &funName is ambiguous when
    funName return a reference.

We can just define this away: &funName if it isn't a @property is the
address of the function.

If it is a @property, ALL operations work on the return value, so it is
rewritten as &(funName()).

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
