---
layout: dip
nr: 29
title: Unique Pointers
dip: 29
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2013-02-28
last-modified: 2013-06-24
language: D2
breaks: Nothing, it enables code that doesn't compile at the moment
permalink: /DIP29
---

Abstract
--------

Currently, pointers cannot be converted to and from shared and immutable
without an explicit and unsafe cast. Unique pointers can be implicitly
cast to and from shared and immutable in safety. A unique pointer can be
discovered by examining the expression that generated the pointer.

Rationale
---------

Requiring switching to unsafe code to do routine things like create
immutable references is a glaring problem. By recognizing unique
pointers much of this can be done safely. More advanced analysis can
uncover more cases that can be done safely.

Definition
----------

Unique Value
:   Rvalues are always unique.


Unique Reference
:   A reference is unique if there are no other references to the same
    object (including references to the object's interior).


Transitively Unique Reference


:   A Unique Reference and there are no external references to any
    values transitively accessible through it.


Implicitly Convertible To Immutable
:   One of:
    1.  The type is implicitly convertible to Immutable.
    2.  Transitively Unique Reference
    3.  Transitive graph is reachable only via immutable references


Implicitly Convertible To Shared
:   One of:
    1.  Type is implicitly convertible to Shared
    2.  Transitively Unique Reference; head is not immutable
    3.  Transitive graph is reachable only via shared or immutable
        references; head is not immutable

Library Types
-------------

Each of these statically verifies that Expression e has the desired
properties. Using the result as an rvalue results in overwriting the
value with T.init. The compiler statically recognizes these types as
having the desired characteristic, i.e. they are magic types.

Each has a static `assume(T` `e)` method which unsafely assumes the
properties of the argument Expression e and returns an instance of the
type.

`Unique(T)(T` `e)`
:   T: class, pointer, dynamic array, delegate
:   Forms a transitively unique reference


`UniqueImmutable(T)(T` `e)`
:   T: class, pointer, dynamic array, delegate
:   Implicitly convertible to immutable(T)


`UniqueShared(T)(T` `e)`
:   T: class, pointer, dynamic array, delegate
:   Implicitly convertible to shared(T)

Expressions
-----------

`Value`
:   This is tried first. If it produces false, the checks for particular
    Expression types are then tried.

:;`Unique`

:   

    :   If all the fields are non-reference types, then true

:;`UniqueImmutable`

:   

    :   If type can be implicitly cast to immutable

:;`UniqueShared`

:   

    :   If type can be implicitly cast to shared


`Variable`
:   If type is Unique, UniqueImmutable, or UniqueShared


`CommaExpression`
:   result of right operand


`=`
`+=`
`-=`
:   result of left operand


`ConditionalExpression`
:   result of left operand and'ed with result of right operand


`AddExpression`
:   if one operand is a pointer, and the other an integral constant,
    then the result is the result of the pointer operand


`CatExpression`
`CatAssignExpression`
:   result is the and'ing of all the elements in the operands


`CallExpression`
:   if function is pure, then result is the and'ing of all the arguments
    to the function


`NewExpression`
:   result is the and'ing of all the arguments. If a constructor is
    called, and it is pure, the result includes the and'ing of all the
    default initializers for the fields


`CastExpression`
:   result of operand being cast


`Lambda`
`FunctionLiteral`
:   result of the expression used to initialize the .ptr field of
    delegates


`IndexExpression`
:   result of operand being indexed


`SliceExpression`
:   result of operand being sliced


`ArrayLiteral`
:   result is the and'ing of all the array elements


`AssocArrayLiteral`
:   result is the and'ing of all the array keys and values


`StructLiteral`
:   result is the and'ing of all the expressions coupled with the
    initializers for the rest of the fields

Implementation
--------------

Add following member functions to Expression:

`bool isUniqueReference();`
\
`bool isTransitivelyUniqueReference();`
\
`bool isImplictlyConvertibleToImmutable();`
\
`bool isImplictlyConvertibleToShared();`

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
