---
layout: dip
nr: 31
title: Defined compile time paradox resolution
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2013-17-27
last-modified: 2014-09-24
author: Amaury SÉCHET
permalink: /DIP31
---

Abstract
--------

It is easy to introduce paradoxes with compile time feature, by
introducing new symbols when they may have been used by other compile
time feature. Currently, what happen in completely implementation
defined and can change from version to version. This DIP intend to
propose a sane way to handle compile time paradoxes.

Rationale
---------

The way compile time paradoxes are handled right now is implementation
defined. it may change with any release, and make it impossible to write
a front end that handle such features in a consistent way with DMD.

Resolution priority
-------------------

Resolution priority are defined as follow :

1.  A construct that do not introduce new symbol (except itself).
2.  A construct that may introduce symbol conditionally.
3.  A construct that may introduce unknown symbols.

The obvious feature of priority 3 is mixin, as it may introduce
arbitrary symbols. All declarations (variables, fields, functions,
method, alias, templates, etc...) are of priority 0, unless they are in
a static if, in which case they become of priority 1. Static ifs are of
the highest priority it contains.

See sample code for constructs with priority noted as comment.

```d
int i; // 1
void foo() {} // 1

static if(condition1) { // 3
    int j; // 2
    static if(condition2) { // 2
        int k; // 2
    }
} else {
    mixin(str); // 3
}
```

All symbol of priority 0 are registered in the symbol table directly.
Symbols of priority 1 are registered as conditional symbols.

Poison mode
-----------

As long as construct of priority 1 or 2 exists, the symbol table is in
poison mode. Any attempt to resolve a symbol will create a poison at the
corresponding entry in addition to process the regular symbol lookup.
Any attempt to register a symbol at a poisoned position is an error.

```d

string foo() {
    return "int foo(int i) { return i; }";
}

mixin(foo()); // Error, foo is poisoned.
```

However, this work as foo don't need to be resolved before the new
overload is mixed in :

```d
string foo() {
    return bar();
}

mixin(bar());

string bar() {
    return "int foo(int i) { return i; }";
}
```

Order of evaluation
-------------------

Construct of priority 2 are evaluated in order of appearance in the
source. When all constructs of priority 2 are reduced, the compiler
start reducing construct of priority 1, in order of appearance.

Example of order of evaluation :

```d
mixin(A); // 1

static if(condition) { // 2
    mixin(B); // 3
    static if(condition2) { ... } // 5
}

static if(condition3) { ... } // 6
mixin(C); // 4
```

Resolution of conditional symbols
---------------------------------

A compile time construct can require the resolution of a conditional
symbol. In this case, construct on which the inclusion of that symbol
depends on are reduced on a per needed basis. If a construct need to
reduce itself, this is an error.

See examples :

```d
bool foo() {
    return true;
}

static if(foo()) { // Error, static if may introduce foo.
    void foo() {}
}
```

```d
bool foo() {
    return true;
}

mixin(bar()); // 1. bar is conditionally included, static if is evaluated.
              // 3. mixin is processed, i is introduced. If is was resolved before, it is an error as i is poisoned.

static if(foo()) { // 2. static if is reduced.
    string bar() { return "int i;"; }
}
```

Symbol withing function call are resolved in order of appearance in the
function, and function are explored in a depth first manner :

```d
int bar() {
    // 2. resolve symbol present in bar in order of appearance.
}

int foo() {
    return bar() + buzz(); // 1. resolve bar.
                           // 3. resolve buzz.
}

int buzz() {
    // 4. resolve symbol in buzz.
}

static if(foo() > 0) { ... }
```

Note: The local scope of method isn't in poison mode.

Examples
--------

Some concern about various examples have been raised in the newsgroup.
This DIP define their behavior properly, but they may require extra
explanations.

```d
static if(is(typeof(y))) int x;
static if(is(typeof(x))) int y;
```

In this case, the first static if is resolved first. Its condition
refers to y, which is a conditionally included symbol withing the second
static if. The compiler proceed to evaluate the second static if. The
condition of the second static if now refers to x, which is
conditionally included in the first static if.

At this point we have a loop and the compiler errors, as the condition
of the first static if depends on the resolution of the first static if.

```d
enum xx = "string x = \"void foo() {}\""

mixin(x);
mixin(xx);
```

Mixin are resolved in order, which mean the first mixin is resolved
first. The symbol x is not found, which is an error. It may be
considered an extra limitation, as this program could have assigned an
unique unambiguous meaning. But mixin can in general introduce arbitrary
symbols and coming with a strategy that is both simple enough for the
developer to understand, and tractable enough for D to compile quickly
seems unrealistic (or I'm not smart enough to imagine it).

Conclusion
----------

This DIP propose a way to ensure that no compile time construct can
change the meaning of previously reduced compile time construct. What
happen right now is such situation is completely implementation defined
(and may change any time). The proposed solution allow to forward
reference symbols within static ifs, so error are reduced to cases where
compile time construct change their own meaning and order in the file
should not matter most of the time.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
