---
layout: dip
nr: 40
title: Template parameter deduction for constructors.
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2013-05-12
last-modified: 2013-05-12
author: Timothee Cour
permalink: /DIP40
---

Abstract
--------

A proposed feature of C++14 is to introduce template parameter deduction
for constructors, see
[paper](http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2013/n3602.html),
mentioned
[here](http://www.meetingcpp.com/index.php/br/items/a-look-at-c14-and-beyond-papers-part-4.html).
The idea is to deduce template parameters when calling a constructor
given the arguments given to the constructor, whenever possible. A
compile error occurs when the deduction is ambiguous. The benefits would
be:

-   make the code more DRY
-   make boilerplate of class instantiators unnecessary in most cases
    (they're all over phobos, eg: std.typecons.tuple,
    std.typecons.rebindable etc)
-   make D more consistent: it deduces template parameters for
    functions, so why not for constructors, when this is unambiguous?
-   it won't break any code.

Note, just as for deduction of normal functions, it should work with 0
or more template parameters specified (ie the first k&gt;=0 templates
may be provided).

Example
-------

```d
import std.typecons;
auto a=Tuple!(int, double)(1,1.0); //not DRY
auto a=tuple(1,1.0); //boilerplate in std.typecons: requires auxiliary class instantiator function 'tuple' just to allow this
auto a=Tuple(1,1.0); //proposed syntax that deduces type parameters
```

Another example:

```d
struct A(T1)
if(isNumeric!T1 && !is(T1==float))
{
    this(T2) if(!isNumeric!T2) (T2 a, T1 b){}
    this()(T1 b){}
    this()(){}
}
struct A(T1)
if(isNumeric!T1 && is(T1==float))
{
    this()(){}
}
struct A(T1)
if (!isNumeric!T1)
{
    this()(T1 a) {}
}

template foo(T3){
struct A(T1){ //not in scope
    this()(T1 a) {}
}
}

template A(T1){
struct A{ //not in scope unless T1 is explicitly instantiated
    this()(T1 a) {}
}
}

static if(false){ 
struct A(T1){//not in scope
    this()(T1 a) {}
}
}


auto a=A(1,1.0); //deduced to A!(double)(1,1.0)
auto a=A(1.0); //deduced to A!(double)(1.0)
auto a=A(); //error: T1 cannot be deduced.
auto a=A(Object.init,1.0); //error: no matching type
```

Deduction
---------

Step 1) Find all matching class/struct types in scope, temporarily
ignoring the template constraints (the 3 struct A definitions in our
example)

Step 2) For each type in step 1, find all constructors, temporarily
ignoring the template constraints (3 + 1 + 1 in our example)

Step 3) This constitutes our overload set. For each element in the
overload set,

-   form list of template parameters that is the concatenation of the
    ones in the type and the ones in the constructor (in our example,
    the 1st one has 2 template parameters (T1,T2) and all the others
    have 1).
-   form list of template constraints as a logical AND of the ones in
    the type and the ones in the constructor

With this transformation, the problem is now the same as for template
deduction of normal functions: we apply the usual template deduction
rules are used, taking into account the number of parameters and
compatibility of template constraints.

Step 4) If there is an ambiguity or no match, give an error, otherwise
instantiate.

Extension
---------

A possible extension is to also allow template parameter deduction for
static functions, using the same mechanism as for templates.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
