---
layout: dip
nr: 41
title: dmd/rdmd command line overhaul.
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2013-05-20
last-modified: 2013-05-20
author: Timothee Cour
permalink: /DIP41
---

Abstract
--------

This DIP seeks to improve dmd and rdmd's command line flags, to make it
more self-consistent and consistent with other tools (including other D
compilers), more expandable, avoid existing corner cases, and better
interact with other tools such as rdmd. It also proposes new flags and
proposes a simple deprecation path to follow.

== Deprecate -offilename (etc) in favor of -of=filename (etc) == Dmd
currently uses 2 conventions for its flags with arguments:

-   type A: -offilename, -Dddocdir, -Dffilename, -Ipath (etc)
-   type B: -version=ident (etc)

Type A, the most common in dmd, is problematic:

-   it doesn't scale: we can't have any new flag starting with "-I" or
    "-L", etc as it would create conflicts.
-   it's visually harder to tell from the command line the options from
    the arguments to these options
-   it's using a different (worst) convention from most other tools
    (including other D compilers, like gdc or ldc)

For reference, ldc uses: -of=filename, -Dd=docdir, -Df=filename, -I=path
etc.

Deprecate passing file without extension
----------------------------------------

I would like to deprecate the current behavior where one can pass the
file name without extension (main vs main.d) as source. Consistency is
better than avoiding to type those 2 characters. I can create a
pathological case where **main.d** is conflicting with **main.d.d** (the
2 files have different contents).

``` {.bash}
rdmd main.d
```

Which one do you think is called when we call rdmd main.d ?

Note, I raised a very analogous concern here
[1](https://github.com/D-Programming-Language/dmd/pull/1871#issuecomment-16101987)
regarding naming of object files in a flat hierarchy, see my example
with

``` {.bash}
dmd -c -oq foo/mod.d foo_mod.d
```

Improving compile and run with arguments
----------------------------------------

The current strategy of rdmd is to treat as input arguments anything
after the first source file:

``` {.bash}
rdmd main.d myfirstprogramarg # a bit awkward, especially with optional extension it gets hard to parse visually.
```

This is error prone, and inconsistent with dmd's behavior, which is:

``` {.bash}
dmd src1.d -run main.d myfirstprogramarg #a bit awkward, need to split the source from the main file.
```

It also makes it impossible to do this:

``` {.bash}
dmd -c main.d 
dmd -run main.o myfirstprogramarg #Error: -run must be followed by a source file
```

I suggest instead something simpler, explicit and consistent, using
-args as a dmd command line argument, that would just work as well with
rdmd:

``` {.bash}
dmd main.d src1.d -args myfirstprogramarg
rdmd main.d -args myfirstprogramarg
```

Distinguish dmd vs rdmd flags with a single flag --dflags
---------------------------------------------------------

Currently we distinguish rdmd's arguments from dmd's arguments via '--'
vs '-'. A better way IMO would be to have a special flag indicating the
start of dmd's (or gdc/ldc...) flags: eg

``` {.bash}
rdmd --chatty --dflags -version=myversion main.d
```

Deprecate rdmd --main (redundant with dmd -main)
------------------------------------------------

dmd -main was introduced in 2.063, so we should deprecate the use of
rdmd --main, which is redundant.

Deprecate dmd -property
-----------------------

see [here](https://github.com/D-Programming-Language/druntime/pull/491)

Provide Long and short help for dmd / rdmd
------------------------------------------

dmd: short help (same as dmd -help=short) dmd -help=long: long help (ie
more detailed help) In particular some flags could have better
description in a long help form: -gc, -gs Another point is that dmd
--help is inconsistent currently: its the only dmd flag with 2 dashes.
This might cause problem with rdmd's current behavior to distinguish
between dmd and rdmd flags, among other things.

New / improved flags
--------------------

-unittest=package.module: unittest a given package/module proposed by
Nick
[here](http://forum.dlang.org/post/20130520215251.00000882@unknown).
(Nick suggested -unittest=pagkage.name.\* but we're going to have
'transparently make module into package' implemented so that particular
form might not be necessary)

-L='space separated list of commands for linker' eg: dmd
-L='-L/opt/local/lib/ -ljpeg' main.d

-profile\_file=filename: to save profile log file to a given filename
instead of default currentdir/trace.{def,log}

Deprecation path
----------------

To implement those changes to dmd and rdmd, we can support both existing
and new behavior using the following deprecation path:

1\) Make all future flags have type B instead of type A.

2\) Migrate all A flags to B flags (say in next dmd release):

2a) One way is to introduce command line arguments -flagstyle=old or
-flagstyle=new:

``` {.bash}
dmd -offilename main.d #works but generates a warning for now, and error in a subsequent dmd release
dmd -flagstyle=old -offilename main.d #works and does not generate a warning.
dmd -flagstyle=new -of=filename main.d #works. After a certain time passed, -flagstyle=new is implied
```

Note, A and B conventions for flags that currently are using A
convention can't be mixed in a command line call, eg: -offilename
-Ddoc=dir will give error, in all 3 cases above.

2b) An alternative way is to use a new binary name (dmd2, reminds of D2,
ldc2, ldmd2) instead of -flagstyle=new. I don't like this as much
somehow, as it requires compiling 2 binaries instead of 1, which
complicates build.

3\) Likewise with the other proposed changes: -flagstyle=old would use
existing behavior, -flagstyle=new would use proposed new behavior.

Notes
-----

It seems at least some of the changes proposed have support of Walter
([here](http://forum.dlang.org/post/kk4ejt$1pnq$1@digitalmars.com)).

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
