---
layout: dip
nr: 45
title: making export an attribute
permalink: /DIP45
---

version: 2

status: Draft

created: 2013-08-27

last-modified: 2013-11-09

author: Benjamin Thaut, Martin Nowak, David Nadlinger

                   -   <http://forum.dlang.org/post/kvhu2c$2ikq$1@digitalmars.com>
                   -   <http://d.puremagic.com/issues/show_bug.cgi?id=9816>
                   
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abstract
--------

Export and its behavior need to be changed in serveral ways to make it
work on Windows and allow better code generation for other plattforms.
The Rationale section explains the problems and shows how this DIP
solves them.

Description
-----------

-   The **export** protection level should be turned into a
    **export** attribute.
-   If a module contains a single symbol annotated with the 'export'
    attribute all compiler internal symbols of this module should
    recieve the 'export' attribute too (e.g. module info).
-   If a class is annotated with the 'export' attribute, all of its
    public and protected functions and members will automatically
    recieve the 'export' attribute. Also all its hidden compiler
    specific symbols will recieve the 'export' attribute.
-   There should be only one meaning of 'export'.
-   It should be possible to access TLS variables across DLL / shared
    library boundaries.
-   On \*nix systems default symbol visibility is changed to hidden, and
    only symbols marked with export become visible.

Rationale
---------

### Turning export into an attribute

Currently **export** is a protection level, the highest level of
visibility actually. This however conflicts with the need to export
'protected' symbols. Consider a Base class in a shared library.

``` {.D}
 module sharedLib;

class Base { 
  protected final void doSomething() { ... } 
}
```

``` {.D}
 module executable; import sharedLib;

class Derived : Base { 
  public void func() 
  { 
    doSomething(); 
  } 
}
```

In the above example 'doSomething' should only be visible to derived
classes but it still needs to be exportable from a shared library.
Therefor **export** should become a normal attribute which behaves
orthogonal to protection.

### Implicitly exporting compiler internal symbols

All compiler internal symbols need to be treated as exported if using an
exported symbol might implicitly reference them to avoid link errors.
The most prominent example is the ModuleInfo which needs linkage if the
module has a *static this()*.

### export attribute inference

Currently export has to be specified in a lot of places to export all
neccessary functions and data symbols. Export should be transitive in
such a sense that it only needs to be specified once in a module to
export all of its functions / data members including classes and their
members / data symbols. Consider the following example:

``` {.D}
module sharedLib;

export:

__gshared int g_Var;             // should be exported

void globalFunc() { ... }        // should be exported

class A                          // compiler internal members should be exported 
{ 
  private: 
    int m_a;

    static int s_b;              // should not be exported

    void internalFunc() { ... }  // should not be exported

  protected: 
    void interalFunc2() { ... }  // should be exported

  public: 
    class Inner                  // compiler internal members should be exported
    { 
      static s_inner;            // should be exported

      void innerMethod() { ... } // should be exported 
    }

    void method() { ... }        // should be exported 
}

private class C                  // should not be exported 
{ 
  public void method() {... }    // should not be exported 
} 
```

### A single meaning of **export**

The classical solution to handle dllexport/dllimport attributes on
Windows is to define a macro that depending on the current build setting
expands to \_\_declspec(dllexport) or to \_\_declspec(dllimport). This
complicates the build setup and means that object files for a static
library can't be mixed well with object files for a DLL. Instead we
propose that exported data definitions are accompanied with an \_imp\_
pointer and always accessed through them. See the implementation detail
section for how this will work for [data
symbols](#Data_Symbols "wikilink") and [function
symbols](#Function_Symbols "wikilink"). That way a compiled object file
can be used for a DLL or a static library. And vice versa an object file
can be linked against an import library or a static library.

### Access TLS variables

Currently it is not possible to access TLS variables across shared
library boundaries on Windows. This should be implemented (see
[{{site.baseurl}}/implementation details](#TLS_variables for a proposal).

### Change symbol visibility on \*nix systems

When building shared libraries on \*nix systems all symbols are visible
by default. This is a main reason for the performance impact of PIC
because every data access and every function call go through the GOT or
PLT indirection. It also leads to long loading time because an excessive
number of relocations have to be processed. Making all symbols hidden by
default significantly reduces the size of the dynamic symbol table
(faster lookup and smaller libraries). See
<http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/Visibility> and
<http://people.redhat.com/drepper/dsohowto.pdf> for more details.

Also making every symbol accessible can inadvertently cause ABI
dependencies making it harder to maintain libraries.

Furthermore, hiding functions by default enables much more aggressive
compiler optimizations, to the benefit of both executable performance
and code size. Some examples for this are elision of completely inlined
functions, optimization of function signatures/calling conventions,
partial inlining/constant propagation, … Some of these optimization
opportunities also positively affect compile times, as evidenced by an
experimental LDC patch (see [LDC
\#483](https://github.com/ldc-developers/ldc/pull/483), although LTO is
required to fully exploit this).

Implementation Details
----------------------

### Windows

#### Data Symbols

For data symbols the 'export' attribute always means 'dllexport' when
defining a symbol and 'dllimport' when accessing a symbol. That is
accessing an exported variable is done through dereferencing it's
corresponding import symbols. When defining an exported variable the
compiler will emit a corresponding import symbol that is initialized
with address of the variable. The import symbol can be located in the
read only data segment. The mangling of the import symbol consists of
the '\_imp\_'/'\_\_imp\_' (Win32/Win64) prefix followed by the mangled
name of the variable. Import symbols itself are not exported. When an
exported variable of the same module is accessed the compiler might
avoid the indirection and perform a direct access.

``` {.D}
module a;

export __gshared int var = 5;
__gshared int* _imp__D1a3vari = &var; // import symbol generated by the compiler

void func()
{
   var = 3; // accesses var directly, because in the same module
}
```

``` {.D}
module b;
import a;

void bar()
{
    var = 5; // accesses through indirection because var is marked as export and in a different module
    // *_imp__D1a3vari = 5; // code generated by the compiler
}
```

#### Function Symbols

For function symbols the 'export' attribute always means 'dllexport'
when defining a function and 'dllimport' when calling a function.
Calling an exported function is always done through the original symbol.
In an import library the original symbol is redifined as trampoline that
simply dereferences the \_imp\_ pointer to the DLL function. Thus
calling an exported function will be compatible with both import
libraries and static libraries, in the later case without indirection.

``` {.D}
module a;

export void func()
{
}

void bar()
{
    func(); // call func; // directly
}
```

``` {.D}
module b;
import a;

void bar()
{
    func(); // call func; // through trampoline
}

// definitions in the import library generated by implib
void func()
{
    asm
    {
        naked;
        jmp [_imp_func];
    }
}
void function() _imp_func = &func; // filled at runtime with the DLL address of func
```

#### TLS variables

For each exported TLS variable the compiler should generate a function
that returns the address of the TLS variable in the current thread.
These internal methods should have some kind of unified prefix to mark
them as TLS import helpers. I propose "\_\_tlsstub\_". These internal
methods are also exported. So when accessing an exported TLS variable
the compiler will insert a call to
'\_imp\_\_D1a15\_\_tlsstub\_g\_tlsFZPi' instead. As an optimization
accesses to exported TLS variables within the same module can be
performed directly.

``` {.D}
module a;

export int g_tls = 5; // thread local storage

export int* __tlsstub__g_tls() // generated by the compiler
{
    return &g_tls;
}
alias _imp___tlsstub__g_tls = __tlsstub__g_tls; // also generated by the compiler

void func()
{
    g_tls = 3; // direct access because marked as export and in the same module
}
```

``` {.D}
module b;
import a;

void bar()
{
    g_tls = 10; // access through _imp___tlsstub__g_tls function because marked as export and in a different module
    // *_imp___tlsstub__g_tls() = 10; // code generated by the compiler
}
```

### \*nix

On \*nix systems the default symbols visibility should be changed to
hidden, i.e. -fvisibility=hidden argument of gcc. Only symbols marked
with **export** should get the attribute visible.

This is trivial to implement on GDC and LDC.

### Linking archives into shared libraries

When linking archives into shared libraries the exported symbols from
the archive will also be exported from the resulting shared library.
Most often this is unwanted and may lead to inadvertent ABI
dependencies. To accomplish this we'll provide a tool that strips export
attributes from archives.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
