---
layout: dip
nr: 49
title: Define qualified postblit
dip: 49
version: 2
status: Draft
created: 2013-11-10
last-modified: 2013-12-17
author: Hara Kenji
permalink: /DIP49
---

Abstract
--------

This DIP resolves the postblit design issues.

Motivation
----------

Plain old postblit concept has an issue that postblits does nothing for
the type qualifiers reinterpretation of the object indirections. For
example:

`struct X {`
`    int[] arr;`
`    this(this) {}`
`}`

If you want to copy mutable X to immutable, compiler automatically
memcpy the object image before the postblit call. But the user-defined
postblit does nothing for the 'arr' field. So, the int\[\] arr will be
interpreted to immutable(int\[\]) by copy.

`int[] arr = [1,2,3];`
`X m = X(arr);`
`immutable X i = m;  // IF this copy invoke X.this(this)`
`static assert(is(typeof(i.arr) == immutable));`
`assert(i.arr == [1,2,3]);`
`arr[] = 100;`
`assert(i.arr == [1,2,3]);  // fails!`

Qualified postblits should provide ways to handle such reinterpretation.

Description
-----------

In the ideal world, objects would have only one of the two qualifiers -
mutable or `immutable`. So, mutable postblit (supports mutable to
mutable copy), and immutable postblit (supports immutable to immutable
copy) are necessary at least.

However, in actual D code, there are two wildcard qualifiers, `const`
and `inout`. Therefore, we should have ways copying an object which the
original qualifier is unknown. And, we would also need a way to copy
objects to distinct qualifiers (mutable to immutable, etc). For those
requests, this DIP will provide additional two concepts, inout postblit
and const postblit.

### Mutable Postblit

If a postblit is unqalified, it will be used for the copy from mutable
source to mutable destination.

`struct S {`
`    int num;`
`    int[] arr;`
`    `<strong>`this(this)`</strong>` {`
`        static assert(typeof(this.num) == int);`
`        static assert(typeof(this.arr) == int[]);`
\
`        num = 1;`
`        // value fields can be initialized again`
\
`        arr[] += 1;  // OK`
`    }`
`}`

Modifying indirections via mutable fields is allowed. The indirections
may be shared with original objects, so mutable postblit may rewrite the
representation of the source object.

`S sm1 = S(1, [1,2,3]);`
`S sm2 = sm1;  // mutable postblit is called`
`assert(sm2.marr == [2,3,4]);`
`assert(sm1.marr == [2,3,4]); // modified`
`assert(sm1.arr.ptr == sm2.arr.ptr);`

### Immutable Postblit

If a postblit is qalified with `immutable`, it will be used for the copy
from immutable source to immutable destination.

`struct S {`
`    int num;`
`    int[] arr;`
`    `<strong>`this(this) immutable`</strong>` {`
`        static assert(typeof(this.num) == immutable int);`
`        static assert(typeof(this.arr) == immutable int[]);`
\
`        num = 1;`
`        // value fields can be initialized again`
\
`        //arr[] += 1;`
`        // cannot modify immutable data`
\
`        arr = this.arr.idup;`
`        // reference field rebinding is allowed`
`    }`
`}`

Of course, you cannot modify indirections during postblitting, because
they are qualified with immutable.

### Inout Postblit

If a postblit is qalified with `inout`, it is used for the copy when
source and destination have same qualifier.

`struct S {`
`    int num;`
`    int[] marr;`
`    const int[] carr;`
`    immutable int[] iarr;`
\
`    static int[] gmarr;`
`    static immutable int[] giarr;`
\
`    `<strong>`this(this) inout`</strong>` {`
`        num = 1;`
`        // value fields can be initialized again`
\
`        //marr[] += 1;`
`        // cannot modify indirections, because at least they are qualified with inout`
`        static assert(is(typeof(marr) == inout int[]));`
`        // you can keep reference fields as-is.`
\
`        //carr = garr;`
`        // initializing const refereneces by mutable/const data is disallowed. Instead`
`        carr = garr.dup;  // initialize by unique expression.`
`        carr = giarr;     // or by immutable data.`
\
`        iarr = giarr;`
`        // initializing immutable reference by immutable data is allowed.`
`    }`
`}`

If inout postblit does nothing for reference fields, the source and
destination may share indirections.

`struct S {`
`    int[] arr;`
`    this(this) inout {`
`        // do nothing for this.arr`
`    }`
`}`
`void main() {`
`    S s1 = S([1,2,3]);`
`    S s2 = s1;  // inout postblit is called`
`    assert(s1.arr.ptr == s2.arr.ptr);`
`    s1.arr[] = 10;`
`    assert(s2.arr == [10, 10, 10]);`
`}`

### Const Postblit

If a postblit is qualified with `const`, it will be used to make
arbitrary qualified copy from arbitrary qualified source.

Mutable and immutable postblit will extend the plain old postblit
definition naturally, by adding a perspective about qualifier conversion
in there. However it is still insufficient for the copy operations of
between incompatible qualifiers (eg. mutable to immutable, const to
mutable, etc).

If a postblit call can guarantee that the copied object owns no
reference to the external state, the object may be convertible to
arbitrary qualifier. In other words, the postblit would have an ability
to construct "unique" copy from arbitrary qualified source object.

So, it could also be called "unique postblit", based on the concept.

Inside const postblit, compiler will enforce following rule: - all of
non-immutable indirections must be re-initialized by Unique Expressions.

`struct S {`
`    int num;`
`    int[] arr;`
`    `<strong>`this(this) const`</strong>` {`
`        num = 1;`
`        // value fields can be initialized again`
\
`        //arr = arr;`
`        // rhs is not an unique expression, so compiler will reject this initialization.`
\
`        // also forbidden to do nothing for the arr field`
\
`        arr = arr.dup;`
`        // arr.dup makes unique expression, so compiler accepts this line.`
`    }`
`}`

#### The definition of *Unique Expressions*

1.  Basic literal values (integers, complexes, characters)
2.  Complex literal values (struct literals, array literals,
    AA literals)

    :   If the literal has subsequent elements, the sub expressions
        should also be unique.

3.  Expressions that has no indirections

    :   For example, multiply integers returns rvalue integer, and
        integer has no indirections, so multiply expression will
        be unique.
    :   `int` `a,` `b,` `c` `=` `a` `*` `b;` `//` `the` `multiply`
        `will` `become` `unique` `expression`

4.  An unique object constructed by const constructor
5.  An unique object constructed by const postblit
6.  A field variable of unique object

    :   `unique_obj.var` is also unique.

7.  An address of unique object

    :   `&unique_obj` is also unique.

8.  A copy of an array

    :   iff the element type supports generating unique copy.

    -   `unique_array[n]`
    -   `unique_array[n` `..` `m]`

9.  An element(s) of unique array
    -   `unique_array[n]`
    -   `unique_array[n` `..` `m]`

10. Concatenation of arrays

    :   By definition, concat expression will always create a newly
        allocated array. So iff the element type has no reference, the
        result will be unique.

11. Pure function call which returns unique object
12. New expression with unique arguments

    :   If a struct type is new-ed with literal syntax, same as "literal
        values" case.
    :   If a class type is new-ed, the called constructor should be
        const constructor.

(maybe this list is not complete)

### Overloading of qualified postblits

If mutable postblit is defined, it is alwasy used for the copies:

-   mutable to mutable
-   mutable to const

` Note that: Different from the previous version of this DIP, mutable postblit is always used for mutable to const copy.`

If immutable postblit is defined, it is alwasy used for the copies:

-   immutable to const
-   immutable to immutable

` Note that: Different from the previous version of this DIP, immutable postblit is always used for immutable to const copy.`

If inout postblit is defined,

-   if mutable postblit is not defined, it will be used for the copies:
    -   mutable to mutable
    -   mutable to const
-   if immutable postblit is not defined, it will be used for the
    copies:
    -   immutable to const
    -   immutable to immutable
-   it is always used for other copies that qualifier transition is
    equal or weaken
    -   const to const
    -   inout to inout
    -   inout to const

If const postblit is defined,

-   it is always used for copies between incompatible qualifiers:
    -   mutable to immutable
    -   const to mutable
    -   const to immutable
    -   immutable to mutable
    -   inout to mutable
    -   inout to immutable
-   if other postblits are not defined, can cover corresponding
    copy directions.
    -   mutable to mutable
    -   mutable to const
    -   const to const
    -   immutable to const
    -   immutable to immutable
    -   inout to inout
    -   inout to const

These priority order is defined based on the following rule:

1.  If source is mutable or immutable, most specialized postblits
    (mutable/immutable postblit) will be used, if they exists.
2.  If inout postblit exists and applicable, it is used.
3.  If const postblit exists, it is used.
4.  Otherwise, "cannot copy" error will occur.

Concatenation of field postblits
--------------------------------

If a struct has a field which has postblit, compiler will generate
postblit implicitly for the enclosing struct.

`struct A {`
`    this(this);`
`}`
`struct S1 {`
`    A a;`
`    // Compiler will generate this(this); implicitly`
`}`

If struct fields have incompatible postblits, compiler implicitly mark
the enclosing struct uncopyable.

`struct B {`
`    this(this) immutable;`
`}`
`struct S2 {`
`    immutable A a;`
`    B b;`
`    // a.this(this); is not callable for the copy from immutable A to immutable A.`
`    // b.this(this) immutable is callable only for the copy from B to B`
`    // Therefore compiler cannot generate appropriate postblit implicitly for S2.`
`    // Then S2 will be marked as uncopyable.`
`}`

To make S2 copyable, you need to define postblit by hand.

`struct S3 {`
`    immutable A a;`
`    B b;`
`    this(this) { // or immutable or inout or const, as you needed`
`        // When this postblit is invoked, Both a and b are immediately after the bitwise copy.`
`        // So re-initializing both fields will be enforced by compiler.`
`        a = immutable A();  // Re-initializing must be required`
`        b = B();            // Re-initializing must be required`
`    }`
`}`

Rules to generate combined postblit from struct fields:

1.  If all of the fields have const postblits, the enclosing struct can
    generate const postblit automatically.
2.  If all of the fields have inout postblits, the enclosing struct can
    generate inout postblit automatically.
3.  If all of the fields have immutable postblits, the enclosing struct
    can generate immutable postblit automatically.
4.  If all of the fields have postblits which support the copy between
    same qualifiers, the enclosing struct can generate mutable
    postblit automatically.

Fix for TypeInfo
----------------

`TypeInfo.postblit(in` `void*` `p);` is invoked on array
copy/concatenation by druntime. So it must support qualified postblits.
For that, following change is necessary.

If a struct S exists:

-   `typeid(S).postblit(&obj)` will call "mutable postblit"
-   `typeid(immutable` `S).postblit(&obj)` will call "immutable
    postblit"
-   `typeid(inout` `S).postblit(&obj)` will call "inout postblit"
-   `typeid(const` `S).postblit(&obj)` will call "const postblit"

If S does not support corresponding postblit, `TypeInfo.postblit` will
throw `Error` in runtime.

`struct S {`
`    this(this) immutable;`
`}`
\
`// trying to invoke mutable postblit will throw Error`
`typeid(S).postblit(&obj);`

Impact to the existing code
---------------------------

Currently, if a struct has no indirection fields, the user-defined
postblit will be invoked on incompatible qualifier copies unrelated to
its qualifier.

`struct S`
`{`
`    int value;  // has no indirection`
`    this(this) { printf("postblit\n"); }`
`}`
`void main()`
`{`
`    S sm;`
`    immutable S si;`
\
`    S sm2 = si;            // invoke S.this(this)`
`    immutable S si2 = sm;  // invoke S.this(this)`
`}`

But after qualified postblit introduced, it won't work anymore. To fix
the issue, you need to change the postblit signature to `this(this)`
`const`.

Other changes will be **undefined behavior**, because until now D
language hadn't defined well about qualified postblits.

Why 'const' postblit will called to copy arbitrary qualified object?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

When an object is constructed by `const` postblit, the destination
object would have either mutable or immutable qualifier. And, const
method is always callable on both mutable and immutable object.

`struct S {`
`    this(this) const { ... }`
`}`
`void main() {`
`    S sm;`
`    immutable S si;`
\
`    // const postblit is callable on constructing mutable object`
`    S sm2 = sm;  //   mutable to mutable`
`    S sm3 = si;  // immutable to mutable`
\
`    // const postblit is callable on constructing mutable object`
`    immutable S si2 = si;  // immutable to immutable`
`    immutable S si3 = sm;  //   mutable to immutable`
`}`

There's no mutation against widely known "const method" concept.

Rationale
---------

See also [DIP53](DIP53 "wikilink").

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
