---
layout: dip
nr: 52
title: Implicit conversions
permalink: /DIP52
---

version: 1

status: Draft

created: 2013-12-11

last-modified: 2013-12-15

author: Simen Kjærås

                   
                   [Related forum discussion \#2](http://forum.dlang.org/post/jul0qv$2l9d$1@digitalmars.com)
                   
                   [WalterAndrei.pdf - DConf 2007](http://s3.amazonaws.com/dconf2007/WalterAndrei.pdf)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abstract
--------

Implicit conversion to and from other types are useful, and is to some
extent covered by existing language features. Some cases are currently
not covered, but could be worthy additions to the toolbox.

Rationale
---------

While too much implicit conversion can be a bad thing, so can too
little. Today, some forms of implicit conversion are only available to
built-in types, and it would prove fruitful for user-defined types to to
have the same abilities.

In
[WalterAndrei.pdf](http://s3.amazonaws.com/dconf2007/WalterAndrei.pdf),
pages 21-22, a mechanism for implicit casting *to* a specified type
(`opImplicitCastTo`) as well as *from* a specified type
(`opImplicitCastFrom`) is outlined.

It can be argued that [alias
this](http://dlang.org/declaration.html#AliasThisDeclaration) provides
the behavior of `opImplicitCastTo`, but there are some missing features
that `opImplicitCastTo` could enable, and `opImplicitCastFrom` is simply
not covered by the language today.

Problem
-------

In a
[discussion](http://forum.dlang.org/post/jul0qv$2l9d$1@digitalmars.com)
on the forum, it was pointed out that while this code works perfectly:

```d
Tuple!(int, int) foo() {
    import std.typecons;
    Tuple!(int, "x", int, "y") a;
    return a;
}
```

The following does not:

```d
Tuple!(int, "x", int, "y") bar() {
    import std.typecons;
    Tuple!(int, int) a;
    return a;
}
```

The problem here is one of specificity. In the first example, the
conversion goes from a specialized type to a less specialized one, and
so the specialized type can provide an alias this returning the less
specialized type.

However, given that this code compiles and works perfectly:

```d
void baz() {
    import std.typecons;
    Tuple!(int, int) a;
    Tuple!(int, "x", int, "y") b;
    a = b; // Implicit conversion to less specialized type.
    b = a; // Implicit conversion to more specialized type.
}
```

It is clear that this limitation is not universal.

Solution
--------

I propose that the functionality of `opImplicitCastFrom` be added to the
language in the following form:

A static function by the name of `opImplicitCastFrom` may be added to
aggregate types. Its return type must be the same as the enclosing type.
It may be a function template.

```d
struct Foo {
    int n;
    static Foo opImplicitCastFrom(T)(T value) {
        return Foo(value);
    }
}
```

-   When a value is returned from a function with a return type
    different from the returned value (e.g `Foo` `fun()` `{` `Bar`
    `bar;` `return` `bar;` `}`):
    -   First attempt alias this.
    -   If alias this fails, rewrite `return` `bar;` to return
        `Foo.opImplicitCastFrom(bar);`
    -   If no match is found, give a compilation error.


-   When a value is attempted assigned to a variable of a type different
    from that of the value (e.g. `Foo` `foo;` `Bar` `bar;` `foo` `=`
    `bar;`):
    -   First attempt opAssign.
    -   If opAssign fails, rewrite `foo` `=` `bar;` to `foo` `=`
        `Foo.opImplicitCastFrom(bar);`
    -   If no match is found, give a compilation error.


-   When a value is given as the sole argument to a constructor of a
    different type (e.g. `Bar` `bar;` `Foo` `foo` `=` `bar;`):
    -   First attempt alias this.
    -   If alias this fails, attempt constructor as per usual.
    -   If constructor fails, rewrite `Foo` `foo` `=` `bar;` to `Foo`
        `foo` `=` `Foo.opImplicitCastFrom(bar);`
    -   If no match is found, give a compilation error.


-   When a value is an argument in a function call, and there's more
    than one function in the overload set (e.g. `foo(bar,` `baz);`):
    -   First attempt regular overloading.
    -   If no match is found, attempt to rewrite each subset of
        parameters where the type has defined `opImplicitCastFrom` to
        `ExpectedType.opImplicitCastFrom(passedValue)`. This has a
        complexity (number of functions in overload set)\*2\^\^(number
        of parameters that define `opImplicitCastFrom`)
    -   If no match is found, or more than one match is found, give a
        compilation error.

Disabling Implicit Conversions
------------------------------

If a function needs to take exactly the specified type, with no implicit
conversions, the type system already enables a programmer to specify
this:

```d
void foo(T)(T value) if (T == uint) {}

uint a = 3;
foo(a); // Works perfectly.

int b = 4;
foo(b); // Fails at compile-time.
```

Use cases
---------

When defining a type it is often desirable to have some implicit
conversion. An example [currently being
discussed](http://forum.dlang.org/post/l87ivq$263r$1@digitalmars.com) on
the forum is Option!T. With `opImplicitCastFrom`, the following would be
made possible:

```d
Option!T foo(T)(bool select, T value) {
    if (select) {
        return value;
    } else {
        return none;
    }
}

void bar(Option!int value) {}

bar(4);
```

std.complex is scheduled to replace built-in complex numbers. For it to
be a full replacement, some new implicit conversions are necessary:

```d
void foo(Complex!float arg) {}

foo(32.15);

Complex!int bar() {
    return 3;
}
```

For tagged unions (std.variant.Algebraic), the very same behavior is
wanted:

```d
void foo(Algebraic!(float, string, int, MyStruct) arg) {}

foo(32.15);
foo(12);
foo("empty string. No, really!");
foo(MyStruct(14, "foo"));

Algebraic!(int, string) bar() {
    return ""; // Actually empty string.
}
```

When a function's signature changes, and the changes are to a type for
which an instance of the original type would be a valid value, no
rewriting of calling code is needed:

```d
// Was void foo(int n) {}
void foo(Nullable!int n) {}

foo(13);

// Was void bar(string arg) {}
void bar(Algebraic!(int, string) arg) {}

bar("testString");
```

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
