---
layout: dip
nr: 56
title: Provide pragma to control function inlining
version: 0
status: Preliminarily approved post 2.067
created: 2014-02-23
last-modified: 2015-02-04
author: Walter Bright
permalink: /DIP56
---

Abstract
--------

This proposal uses pragmas to add inlining instructions to the compiler.

Rationale
---------

Sometimes generating better code requires runtime profile information.
But being a static compiler, not a JIT, the compiler could use such
hints from the programmer.

Description
-----------

This adds a pragma 'inline', which is followed by an optional boolean
expression, which influences the inlining of the function it appears in.
An evaluation of 'true' means always inline, 'false' means never inline,
and no argument means the default behavior, as indicated in the command
line.

If this pragma is outside of a function, it affects the functions in the
block it encloses.

Nested pragmas override the outer ones.

If there are multiple pragmas inside a function, the lexically last one
that is semantically analyzed controls the behavior.

If the pragma is versioned out or in a false static if conditional, it
is ignored.

If a pragma specifies always inline, and the compiler cannot inline it,
a warning will be generated. Implementations will likely vary in their
ability to inline.

These are not attributes because they should not affect the semantics of
the function. In particular, the function signature must not be
affected.

Usage
-----

With the `-inline` compiler flag:

`   pragma(inline, true)    always inlines`
`   pragma(inline, false)   never inlines`
`   pragma(inline)          inlines at compiler's discretion`

Without the `-inline` compiler flag:

`   pragma(inline, true)    always inlines`
`   pragma(inline, false)   never inlines`
`   pragma(inline)          never inlines`

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
