---
layout: dip
nr: 64
title: DIP64 Attribute Cleanup
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2014-06-20
last-modified: 2014-06-20
author: Brian Schott
permalink: /DIP64
---

Abstract
--------

The number of annotations in the D language continues to grow. Adding
all of the correct annotations to declarations can cause these
declarations to become very verbose.

There is some inconsistency between the syntax of various attributes
because of historical reasons. For example, "pure" and "@nogc" are
inconsistent because one of them uses the @identifier syntax and the
other does not, yet they are both compiler-defined attributes.

This DIP intends to fix these issues in two ways:

1.  The definition of attribute sets, which allow users to combine
    multiple annotations into a single annotation and
2.  The deprecation of the old-style attributes that do not use
    the @-syntax. A tool will be created that can easily update code to
    use the new attributes. (e.g. by translating "nothrow"
    to "@nothrow")

Atribute Sets
-------------

First, an example. The following code using attribute sets:

``` {.D}
@spiffy = @pure @nothrow @safe;

float mul(float a, float b) @spiffy
{
    return a * b;
}
```

is semantically equivalent to the following code that does not:

``` {.D}
float mul(float a, float b) @pure @nothrow @safe
{
    return a * b;
}
```

Arguments to attribute sets will be passed on to the attributes that
compose the set. For example:

``` {.D}
@special(name) = @serializable(name) @entity(name);
@special("abc")
struct SpecialStruct { int a; }
```

is the same as

``` {.D}
@serializable("abc") @entity("abc")
struct SpecialStruct { int a; }
```

### Grammar Changes

A new rule called AttributeSetDeclaration will be added to the
Declaration rule:

    Declaration:
        ...
        AttributeSetDeclaration
        ...

AttributeSetDeclaration will be defined as follows:

    AttributeSetDeclaration:
        Property '=' Property+ ';'

Attribute Consistency
---------------------

Keywords that are only attributes (i.e. they are not also storage
classes or type constructors) will be deprecated. The compiler
front-ends will need to be modified to recognize the new @-versions of
the attributes as equivalent to their old non-@-versions (e.g. "@pure"
is equivalent to "pure").

To aid in this transition a tool will be constructed on top of the lexer
contained in the D-Scanner project. Because this is only a keyword
substitution the chances of this tool failing are incredibly low. All
whitespace, comments, and other formatting will be preserved by this
tool.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
