---
layout: dip
nr: 68
title: Add @nogc attribute on types
version: 3
status: Draft
created: 2014-11-10
last-modified: 2014-11-10
author: Tomer Filiba
permalink: /DIP68
---

Abstract
--------

This DIP proposes the addition of a compiler-enforced `@nogc` attribute
on types. This means means such a type cannot be allocated by the GC,
e.g., using operator `new` on such a type or appending such a type to a
dynamic array, would result in compile-time errors.

It enforces separation between deterministic and non-deterministic
finalization and lifetime of objects, which is crucial for proper RAII
idiom.

Rationale
---------

Implementing RAII properly requires deterministic resource management,
thus objects managed by the GC cannot be safely used for such purposes.
The GC offers little to no guarantees on when (or even whether)
destructors be called, or the order in which resources are released. It
is clear one cannot rely on GC-managed objects for RAII. It would be
suggested, therefore, that objects implementing the RAII idiom be
stack-allocated structs (rather than classes, etc), which is necessary
but not sufficient -- as long as one cannot enforce that such structs do
not enter the GC heap.

The purpose of this DIP is exactly that -- to designate structs (and
possible other types, such as `emplaced` classes) as types that must not
be allocated and managed by the GC. Any object with a non-deterministic
life-time (i.e., GC-managed) will not be able to hold `@nogc` types,
thus ensuring RAII is preserved.

Description
-----------

Like `@nogc` on functions, `@nogc` on structs is transitive (albeit in
the reverse direction): if struct `A` holds a member of type `B`, and
`B` is marked `@nogc`, then `A` inherits the `@nogc`. Pointers to such
types are allowed in any context.

A complementary attribute, e.g., `__traits(isNoGC,` `T)` or
`__traits(getTypeAttributes,` `T)` would be needed for reflection.

Usage
-----

``` {.D}
@nogc struct MyStruct {
    int x;
    string y;
}

void foo() {
    MyStruct ms;                 // compiles
    auto ms2 = new MyStruct();   // does not compile
    MyStruct[] arr; 
    arr ~= MyStruct();           // does not compile

    auto ms3 = cast(MyStruct*)malloc(MyStruct.sizeof);  // this is fine, of course
}
```

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
