---
layout: dip
nr: 71
title: noscope and out!param
permalink: /DIP71
---

created: 2015-01-18

last-modified: --

author: Zach Tollen

                   
                   Related:
                   
                   -   [DIP25: 'return' parameter attribute](http://wiki.dlang.org/DIP25)
                   
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Motive
------

The compiler must be able to know from a function's signature how its
reference parameters may escape. Armed with this information, the
compiler can guarantee memory safety, and other things. Therefore,
information about what a function does with its reference parameters
must be transferred to its signature.

Any unsafe escape which is not marked in the signature should cause an
error in @safe code, at least. Inference should be used eventually to
alleviate the burden of manually marking the signatures.

In a Nutshell
-------------

There are three ways for a reference parameter to unsafely escape a
function: by return, by global, and by mutable parameter. DIP25
introduces 'return' parameters in order to deal with escape by return.
The current DIP introduces 'noscope' and 'out!param' to address the
latter two, respectively.

Here are examples of the three ways:

``` {.D}
static T* s;

T* fun(T* p1, T** p2) {
  // escape by global
  s = p1;
    
  // escape by return
  return p1;

  // escape by mutable argument
  *p2 = p1;
}
```

'noscope' simply means that the parameter's reference may get copied to
global pointers, as illustrated in 'escape by global' above.

'out!param', or 'out!(param1, param2, ...)' means that any of the listed
parameters' references may get copied to where the attributed parameter
points. 'out!param' is a completely different attribute from 'out'. You
would have to write both if necessary.

The above function, written with the new attributes:

``` {.D}
T* fun(return noscope T* p1, out!p1 T** p2) {
  s = p1;    // escape by global: okay
  return p1; // escape by return: okay
  *p2 = p1;  // escape by mutable argument: okay
}
```

A more comprehensive description of how the compiler keeps track of its
references is beyond the scope of this DIP.
