---
layout: dip
nr: 72
title: Provide a Uniform Compiler Info Syntax
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2015-02-03
last-modified: --
author: Orvid King
permalink: /DIP72
---

Abstract
--------

The purpose of this DIP is to provide a unified way of providing
additional information to an optimizing compiler in a way that is
portable across implementations.

Rationale
---------

[DIP56](DIP56 "wikilink") would create a way to manually control
inlining, but would do it in a way that could cause issues with
compilers that don't support it. LDC and GDC also both have a couple of
their own attributes used to specify certain compiler information.

Description
-----------

By providing an attribute at the language level to allow the user to
provide additional information to an optimizing compiler, we can speed
the acceptance of the addition of new facets of the attributes in the
individual implementations, because each implementation will vary in
their ability to handle the attributes. If a compiler cannot handle a
specific attribute, it will simply ignore it. If the user has specified
-vcompiler on the command line, then information about the attributes
that are ignored will be dumped. This is an acceptable way to handle a
compiler not supporting a specific attribute, because the only
attributes that belong in this section are ones that have no functional
change. That is to say, the code they are applied on will produce the
same result regardless of if a compiler supports the attribute or not.

Usage
-----

It is proposed that this be implemented in a fashion similar to UDA's,
except that arbitrary identifiers will be allowed within the
parenthesis. For [DIP56](DIP56 "wikilink") the result would be:

`@compiler(inline, never)`
`@compiler(inline, always)`
`@compiler(inline, default)`

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
