---
layout: dip
nr: 81
title: Writing files at compile time
version: 2
status: Draft
created: 2015-08-12
last-modified: --
author: Jakob Demler
permalink: /DIP81
---

Introduction
------------

Generating code at compile time using compile time reflection is one of
the most distinguishable features of the D programming language. It is
used for serialization, unit testing libraries, template engines and
many more. Nevertheless there are some reoccuring problems with the
development process and usage of mixins:

debugging
:   The debugger cannot attach to mixedin code; one has to print the
    resulting code with pragma(msg, ) to inspect it

compile-speed
:   Even if the resulting code does not change, mixedin code has to be
    compiled anyway

scalability
:   If the generated code is needed in two seperated places of the code,
    it has to be mixedin twice or has to be mixedin into a special
    module which introduces overhead

transparency
:   As user of a library which relys on compile time code generation one
    has often no idea what code is generated

To deal with these problems this proposal will introduce the idea of
writing the generated code into D sourcefiles which entails some
solutions.

Syntax
------

Considering that the writing to files at compile time and at run time
are two very different processes, a syntax must be found that makes them
easily distinguishable. Also as reading files at compile time is already
implemented using the *import*-keyword the following syntax is proposed:

```d
  export(filename, content);
```

Where *filename* is follows C standard library's fopen semantics and
*content* is the string written to the file. Both *filename* and
*content* have to be known at compile time.

Even though the *export* keyword collides with the access specifier, it
seems to be the best solution as it is intuitive, matches the *import*
syntax for reading files at compile time, is easily distinguishable from
run time file writing and does not break current code (as export is
already a keyword).

Use Cases
---------

### vibe.d's diet templates

How does this feature now solve the problems mentioned above? Consider
for example vibe.d's diet templates:

User provided template files are compiled with usage of compile time
reflection and provided types to sourcecode. At the moment the resulting
code is mixed in into a templated function which is called by the user:

<https://github.com/rejectedsoftware/vibe.d/blob/master/source/vibe/templ/diet.d>
lines: 54ff

```d
void compileDietFileIndent(string template_file, size_t indent, ALIASES...)(OutputStream stream__)
{
  [...] 
  // Generate the D source code for the diet template
  //pragma(msg, dietParser!template_file(indent));
  static if (is(typeof(diet_translate__)))
    mixin(dietParser!(template_file, diet_translate__)(indent));
  else
    mixin(dietParser!template_file(indent));
}
```

Using the write-to-file at compile time feature the code would change to
something like the following:

```d
void compileDietFileIndent(string template_file, size_t indent, ALIASES...)(OutputStream stream__)
{
  [...]
  // Generate the D source code for the diet template
  static if (is(typeof(diet_translate__)))
    enum contents = dietParser!(template_file, diet_translate__)(indent);
  else
    enum contents = dietParser!template_file(indent);

  export(template_file ~ ".d", contents);

  mixin("import vibe.templ.diet.compiled.templatename");
  renderCompiledTemplate!(Aliases)(stream);
}
```

This example looks more verbose but it entails serveral improvements:
The .dt.d file can not only be inspected (without commenting in the
pragma(msg, ) line) but also debugged using a debugger. It does not have
to be compiled every time the compileDietFileIdent function is compiled
but only if the resulting code changes (either the .dt file or the used
types change). A vibe.d user can inspect and understand what is going on
under the hood easily. Resulting in less magic, surprise and in case of
bugs inside the template engine or the template, in faster location of
the bug.

### SQL Library

Imagine a sql library that encapsulates the sql itself from the user:

```d
  CreateTableIfNotExists!UserDefinedType(DBConnection);
```

SQL would be generated using compile time reflection and TMP. The user
of this library would be able to change the resulting sql with
attributes.

The user does not need to inspect the resulting sql (as is the purpose
of this imaginary library) but, nevertheless for debugging and
understanding it would be helpfull if he could.

The library could generate .sql.d files which include the generated sql
as constant strings. Implementing CreateTableIfNotExists could look like
this:

```d
void CreateTableIfNotExists(UDT)(DBConnection con)
{
  mixin("import "~moduleName!UDT~".sql;");
  con.exec(CreateTableIfNotExistsSql);
}
```

The code could be created in a central register function:

```d
void RegisterUDT(UDT)()
{
  export("sql/"~moduleName!UDT~".sql.d", GenerateSql!UDT);
}
```

Thinking further
----------------

Altough the primary use case seems to be code generation, all
computations based on the type system that result in string would
benefit from this feature: Think of libraries that generate
configuration files, css or any other dsl from user defined types with
the help of attributes, compile time reflection and TMP. Though this
could also be achieved with the features at hand (generating the string
at compile time and writing it to a file at run time) an 'export'
functionality would make it much more convinient to do so.

As we only start to recognize the capabilities of TMP in combination
with compile time reflection, it is important not to underestimate the
implications of the extensions of its features.

Alternatives
------------

### Two step compilation

As mentioned in the [original forum
thread](http://forum.dlang.org/post/qurgvddnfwzelsaqflwr@forum.dlang.org),
it is already possible to do this using a workaround: If a that is
generated exists it is imported otherwise it is created. However, this
results in two distinct run times and there is no way to conveniently
regenerate the sourcefile if the input has changed.

### Expanding Mixins and Templates

Another idea, mentioned in the forum discussion, is to expand template
instantiations and mixins during the compilation process and writing the
expanded versions to .di files. Expanding template instantiations would
be handled with template constraints. So for every instantiation a new
template would be generated with the exact fitting constraint for it.
These expanded source files would be debuggable. Nevertheless this idea
has some flaws:

1.  The resulting interface files will become horribly huge. Imagine
    templated functions that are instantiated a thousand times or more.
2.  There would be no way to easily tell the compiler which mixins and
    templates to expand and which not.
3.  In case of users using a library the interesting part of the
    gernerated code would not be in a user source file but in some
    source file inside the library. To debug and/or inspect it the user
    needs to know in which source file the relevant code is generated.

All in all this idea seems to be able to serve the needs for small
mixins and projects. But in combination with TMP and even a medium sized
project this approach becomes impractical.

Implementation Considerations
-----------------------------

The discussion of the first version of this DIP revealed some
fundamental flaws in its original idea:

1.  A file system must be optional in the compilation process
2.  How can the compiler ensure that an imported file is already
    generated, especially in case of parallel compilation

These problems are solved by letting the export-function not write to
the file system directly, but into a compiler-internal key-value
storage. Imports would then look into this storage and block in case of
a not yet generated file. If the compiler is blocked by such an import
it would queue the current source file and move on with the next. The
compiler would report an error in two cases:

1.  If a key is written more than once
2.  If an imported key is never written to

At the end of the compilation process the compiler can write those
key-value pairs as files to the file system. This is optional and
controlled by a compiler switch.

Problems and limitations
------------------------

Even though the use cases appear intriguing, the *create file at compile
time* feature does not seem to solve all problems:

1.  One is not able to manually edit the generated source between the
    generation and import process, as both happen inside one
    compiler call.
2.  It is not trivially possible to only generate a source file if it is
    not up-to-date anymore. Unnecesarry computations are not avoided.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
