---
layout: dip
nr: 83
title: Configurable Assert Diagnostics
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2015-10-01
last-modified: --
author: Per Nordlöw
permalink: /DIP83
---

Abstract
--------

Allow for **assert** to do pretty printing of its failing expression
when flagged for in call to compiler. Printing is configurable via
specific sets of (template) function overloads.

Rationale
---------

A failing assert (in a unittest), currently, give no hint about why it
failed. To aid the developer in debugging, the failing assert of a

-   binary expression, such as **assert(x == y)**, should print the
    values of **x** and **y** and
-   unary expression, such as **assert(!x)**, should print the value of
    **x**.

This extra, so called, pretty printing can be enabled by changing the
dmd flag **-unittest** to, say, **-unittest=verbose** for a specific
failing module. This will be more convenient than explicitly adding the
prints of the left-hand-side expression **lhs** and right-hand-side
expression **rhs** directly before the call to the failing assert.

Description
-----------

This DIP proposes to add library-level-configurable diagnostics to
failing calls to **assert(expr)** typically called from within
**unittest**-blocks.

This diagnostics is activated only when DMD is called with a specific
command line flag, say **-unittest=verbose** or perhaps
**-diagnose=assert**.

Modifications needed in Compiler Frontend
-----------------------------------------

### Binary Operator Lowering

If DMD is called with this flag it will rewrite (lower) all assert
expressions (**AssertExpr** in dmd source) such as

```d
assert(a BINOP b)
```

into

```d
(auto ref a, auto ref b) {
    if (a BINOP b) return;
    onAssertFailed!"BINOP"(a, b, __FILE__, __LINE__, __FUNCTION__, __MODULE__);
} (e1, e2)
```

where **onAssertFailed**, in this binary operator case, is declared as

```d
void onAssertFailed(string op, E1, E2)(E1 e1, E2 e2, string file, uint line, string function, string module);
```

### Unary Operator Lowering

Similarly, for unary expressions, rewrite (lower)

```d
assert(UNOP e)
```

with

```d
(auto ref e) {
    if (UNOP e) return;
    onAssertFailed!"UNOP"(e, __FILE__, __LINE__, __FUNCTION__, __MODULE__);
} (e)
```

where on onAssertFailed, in this unary operator case, is declared as

```d
void onAssertFailed(string op, E)(E e, string file, uint line, string function, string module);
```

### Non-Operator Lowering

For the case when no unary or binary operator is present in the top
assert expression, unary overload of **onAssertFailed** is called with
**op** being empty string. In other words the **assert** expression

```d
assert(e)
```

is rewritten (lowered) into

```d
(auto ref e) {
    if (e) return;
    onAssertFailed!""(e, __FILE__, __LINE__, __FUNCTION__, __MODULE__);
} (e)
```

If the assert lowering must also be sensitive to expressions like

### Non-Equality Operator Lowering

Further note that operator **!=** may need special care because D only
supports overloading via **opUnary!"!"** and **opBinary!"=="**. This
because the D compiler rewrites

```d
x != y
```

into

```d
!(x == y)
```

To make assert diagnostics as configurable as possible it may become
relevant to enable the possibility for the developer to to define the
overload **onAssertFailed!"!="** aswell. If this is desirable the
lowering logic in DMD must be sensitive to expressions

```d
assert(!(a == b))
```

which, preferrably, will be rewritten to

```d
(auto ref a, auto ref b) {
    if (!(a == b)) return;
    onAssertFailed!"!="(a, b, __FILE__, __LINE__, __FUNCTION__, __MODULE__);
} (e1, e2)
```

Modifications needed in D Runtime
---------------------------------

### Configuring Diagnostics

The default implementations (in druntime) of all the
**onAssertFailed**-overloads should, as a first step, by defined to
exactly mimic the current behaviour of **assert()**. This because,
memory requirements of the call to DMD will increase when the compiler
must generate terminal printing-code of all the arguments for all the
unittests found in the compilation unit of interest. And it is currently
unclear if this, current increase in system requirements, will be
compatible with system resources currently available in build servers
connected to GitHub.

Specific printing behaviour of **assert()** diagnostics can then be
extendable by adding (typically templated) overloads of
**onAssertFailed** for specific sets of types (concepts).

For instance, diagnostics specifically when comparing arithmetic types,
could be realized through the overload

```d
import std.traits : isArithmetic;
void onAssertFailed(string op, E1, E2)(E1 e1, E2 e2, string file, uint line, string function, string module)
    if (isArithmetic!L && 
        isArithmetic!R)
{
    version(assert)
    {
        import core.exception : AssertError;
        throw AssertError("Failed arithmetic assert: " ~ e1 ~ " " ~ binOp ~ " " ~ e2);
    }
}
```

In this way D would get the extendability we want in testing-frameworks
such as **std.experimental.testing**
(https://github.com/D-Programming-Language/phobos/pull/3207) without
adding a new **assert**-overload-set and without sacrifycing default
memory usage in DMD/Phobos unittests.

Further, this solution enables the possibility to provide fancy
diagnostics behaviour in **onAssertFailed** for failing
**array**/**range** or aggregate (**struct** or **class**) comparisons.
This diagnostics could also have different pretty printing backends such
as HTML.

Examples of Possible Diagnostics Outputs
----------------------------------------

### Short Array Assert Arguments

For example a failing

```d
assert([1,2,3] == [1,2,4]);
```

could pretty-print

```d
([1,2,3][2] is 3) != ([1,2,4][2] is 4)
```

### Aggregate Assert Arguments

or, for aggregates, a failing

```d
struct A { int x, y; }
auto a = A(1,2);
auto b = A(1,3);
assert(a == b);
```

could pretty-print

```d
(a.y is 2) != (b.y is 3)
```

### Large Array Assert Arguments

or, for very large arrays, a failing

```d
const n = 1_000_000;
auto a = iota(0, n).array;
auto b = a.dup;
a[1_000 .. 1_002] = 0;
assert(a == b);
```

could pretty-print

```d
(a[1_000 .. 1_002] is [0, 0]) != (b[1_000 .. 1_002] is [1_000, 1_001])
```

An optional **multiLine** flag could in this case be motivated. When set
this flag changes output to

```d
(a[1_000 .. 1_002] is [0, 0]) !=
(b[1_000 .. 1_002] is [1_000, 1_001])
```

This in order for comparison to be more visually helpful to developers.

References
----------

Parts of the solution list at

<https://issues.dlang.org/show_bug.cgi?id=5547#c3>

including rewriting/expansion of **AssertExpr** could probably reused.

### Discussions on topic

-   <http://forum.dlang.org/post/holdxspayjguauomrbcx@forum.dlang.org>

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
