---
layout: dip
nr: 84
title: Static Inheritance
dip: 84
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2015-10-30
last-modified: --
author: Atila Neves
permalink: /DIP84
---

Abstract
--------

Express intent to the compiler that a user-defined type conforms to a
static interface.

Rationale
---------

Currently, D uses template constraints as a means of restricting the
types a template function/struct/class can be instantiated with. Common
examples are `isInputRange!R` and `isOutputRange!(R,` `E)`. It is also
common to statically assert that a user-defined type satisfies the
template constraint predicate:

``` {.D}
struct Struct
{
    //...
    static assert(isInputRange!Struct);
}
```

While this works, when the static assertion fails there is no help from
the compiler to guide the developer to fix the error. This is in stark
constrast to runtime polymorphism, where:

``` {.D}
interface Interface
{
    void foo();
}

class Class : Interface
{
    //... no foo here
}
```

yields a compiler error message indicating that `void` `foo()` `is`
`not` `implemented`. Similarly, it is not possible to instantiate a
class with unimplemented abstract functions without getting an
equivalent error.

This DIP attempts to make static polymorphism as easy to adhere to as
the more well-known and established runtime variety. This is
particularly important for D due to the emphasis on the former with
respect to other languages.

Description
-----------

This DIP proposes a backwards-compatible change to the language so that
it becomes possible for classes and structs to "inherit" from a template
constraint predicate. Since classes can already inherit from interfaces
and one class, the `static` keyword would be added to distinguish:

``` {.D}
class Class : static isInputRange
{
    //...
}
```

Structs can't currently inherit and so wouldn't need `static`. However,
it might be preferable to require it anyway for parity with classes:

``` {.D}
struct Struct : isInputRange // or struct Struct : static isInputRange
{
   //...
}
```

Static inheritance would only be syntatically valid if the right-hand
side of the colon is equivalent to a template of the form:

``` {.D}
template Predicate(T) {
    enum Predicate = is(typeof(() { /*code*/ }));
}
```

The enclosed lambda would be allowed to have default arguments. Since
templates must be visible, the compiler would have access to the code
block inside the lambda. This is essential for the diagnostics.

In the case of multiple template arguments for the predicate, as is the
case for `isOutputRange`, all but the first would be omitted for the
static inheritance:

``` {.D}
struct Struct: isOutputRange!(int)
{
    //...
}
```

And the predicate must have N + 1 arguments:

``` {.D}
enum Predicate(T, U) { /*...*/ }
```

Implementation
--------------

Assuming that the static inheritance is syntatically valid as described
above, the compiler would lower the struct/class definition from:

``` {.D}
struct Struct: Predicate
{
    //...
}
```

to:

``` {.D}
struct Struct
{
   //as before

   //added by the compiler:
   static if(!Predicate(Struct))
   {
       auto failFunc(/* same args as lambda*/)
       {
           //insert code inside the lambda, substituting the types accordingly
       }
   }
}
```

In case the predicate has more than one template argument, it would go
from:

``` {.D}
struct Struct : Predicate!(T...)
{
    //...
}
```

to:

``` {.D}
struct Struct
{
   static if(!Predicate(Struct, T))
   {
       auto failFunc(/* same args as lambda*/)
       {
           //insert code inside the lambda, substituting the types accordingly
       }
   }
}
```

It would be best to change the line numbers reported in the resulting
error messages to be changed to the line where the static inheritance is
declared.

Alternatively, a new compiler trait \_\_traits(compilesNoSuppress) could
be used. It would work the same way as \_\_traits(compiles) but would
print out error messages when compilation failed. In that case, the
first example would be lowered to:

``` {.D}
static assert(__traits(compilesNoSupress, isInputRange!Struct));
struct Struct
{
    //as before
}
```

This has the immediate advantage of not requiring any line number
changes.

Examples of lowering
--------------------

For `isInputRange`, the original definition is shown followed by the
lowering:

``` {.D}
struct In: isInputRange { }

struct In
{
    static if(!isInputRange!(In))
    {
        auto failFunc(inout int = 0)
        {
            In r = In.init;
            if (r.empty) {}
            r.popFront();
            auto h = r.front;
        };
    }
}
```

For `isOutputRange`:

``` {.D}
struct Out: isOuputRange!int { }

struct Out
{
    static if(!isOutputRange!(Out, int))
    {
        auto failFunc(inout int = 0)
        {
            Out r = Out.init;
            int e = int.init;
            put(r, e);
        }
    }
}
```

Improvements
------------

Instead of relying on compilation errors from the code copied from the
lambda, it should be possible to generate even better compiler errors
for well-known types from the standard library.
