---
layout: dip
nr: 85
title: Lazy Initialization of const Members
version: 2
status: Draft
created: 2015-11-14
last-modified: --
author: Marc Schütz
permalink: /DIP85
---

Abstract
--------

This DIP proposes an officially sanctioned way to initialize const
members (or mutable members of const structs) lazily by allowing limited
mutation of const objects.

Rationale
---------

Lazy initialization is a widely applied technique to 1) defer
initialization of a struct or class member until it is actually needed,
and 2) cache and reuse the result of an expensive computation. With
current const semantics in D, this require objects and structs
containing such variables to be mutable. As a consequence, any method
that wants to make use of a lazily calculated member cannot be annotated
as const, and all functions calling these methods require non-const
references to such objects in turn.

Description
-----------

A new annotation of member variables is proposed, reusing the existing
keyword `lazy`. A member annotated as `lazy` triggers the following
behaviours:

-   it is required to be private
-   no static immutable objects with a lazy member may be created
-   dynamically created immutable objects with lazy members are allowed
    if all lazy members are marked as `shared`
-   it can be assigned to even if it is const, but only if it has been
    read at most once

The first three rules are enforced statically. The last one is checked
by an `assert()` at runtime using a hidden flag member; in `-release`
mode, this check (including the hidden member) is removed.

The second rule is necessary because static immutable objects could be
placed in physically read-only memory by the linker and therefore cannot
be modified.

The third rule prevents race conditions for implicitly shared immutable
objects. Access to shared lazy members must be atomic or otherwise
synchronized.

The last rule ensures that external code can never observe a change to
the field's value.

The compiler needs to make sure not to apply optimizations based on the
assumption that a `lazy` member never changes. Use of `lazy` in this way
is therefore `@safe`. It is, however, limited to values that can be
written to the member directly. More complex applications, e.g.
memoization depending on parameters using an associative array, or
reference counting (which requires more than one mutation) can be
implemented by casting the const-ness away. The compiler will still make
sure that no breaking optimization are applied, but it can no longer
enforce correctness, which makes casting away const un-@safe.

Usage
-----

``` {.D}
import std.stdio;
class MyClass {
    void hello() { writeln("Hello, world!"); }
}
struct S {
    // reference types
    lazy private MyClass foo_;
    @safe @property foo() const {
        if(!foo_)
            foo_ = new MyClass;
        return foo_;
    }
    // value types
    lazy private int bar_;
    @safe @property bar() const {
        if(!bar_)
            bar_ = expensiveComputation();
        return bar_;
    }
    // complex
    lazy uint[uint] factorial_;
    @trusted factorial(uint x) const pure {
        if(factorial_ is null)
            factorial_ = createEmptyAA!(uint[uint]); // initialize once
        auto tmp = cast(uint[uint]) factorial_;      // cast to mutable
        if(auto found = x in tmp)
            return *found;
        auto result = computeFactorial(x);
        tmp[x] = result;
        return result;
    }
}

void main() {
    const S s;
    s.foo.hello();
    writeln("bar = ", s.bar);
    writeln("5! = " s.factorial(5));
    writeln("6! = " s.factorial(6));
}
```

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
