---
layout: dip
nr: 88
title: Named Parameters
dip: 88
version: 1
status: Draft
created: 2016-01-23
last-modified: 2016-01-23
author: Jacob Carlborg
permalink: /DIP88
---

Abstract
--------

This document describes a simple form of named parameters

Rationale
---------

Sometimes it can be very useful to be able to use named parameters. It
mostly increases the documentation at the call site.

```d
Rect createRect(int x, int y, int width, int height);
createRect(0, 0, 200, 200);
```

In the above example it's not so easy to see at the call site what the
different arguments mean. In what order should the coordinate and size
be passed?

Another typical example is with boolean arguments:

```d
void sendRequest(Request req, bool log);
sendRequest(req, true);
```

Again, at the call site it can be difficult to remember what the boolean
flag means.

Supporting named parameters directly in the language prevents the need
to add workarounds with weird looking syntax like
<https://dlang.org/phobos/std_typecons.html#.Flag>.

Description
-----------

This is a proposal for a simple form of named parameters.

### Simple Example

Simple example of declaring and calling a function with named
parameters:

```d
Rect createRect(int x:, int y:, int width:, int height:);
createRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 200, height: 200);
```

### Rules

1.  Any parameter that is supposed to be nameable at the call site needs
    to be explicitly declared as such. This is required because
    otherwise the parameters of all exist functions would become part of
    the API
2.  It's legal mix named and non-named parameters, both when declaring a
    function and calling the function
3.  It's optional to name the parameters when calling a function
    declared with named parameters
4.  It's *not* legal to change the order of the arguments at the call
    site when using the named parameter syntax. This simplifies the
    function overloading rules (no change is required)
5.  A named parameter at the call site will *not* conflict with any
    other symbol with the same name
6.  For the initial version it's *not* legal to declare a variadic
    parameter as a named parameter. This restriction might be lifted in
    the future
7.  Combining a template specialization with a named parameter requires
    a space between the two colons
8.  It's *not* legal to overload a function purely based on the
    parameter names. The overloading rules do not change with this
    proposal

### Syntax

A new syntax is added to be used when declaring a function that should
be callable with named parameters:

```d
Rect createRect(int x:, int y:, int width:, int height:);
```

Each parameter that should be able to be named at the call site is
required to end with a colon.

Calling a function using the named parameter syntax:

```d
createRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 200, height: 200);
```

Prefix the function arguments with the name of the parameter, a colon is
used to separate the name of the parameter from the vale of the
argument.

The same can be applied to templates:

```d
struct Array(ElementType:) {}
Array!(ElementType: int) array;
```

Examples
--------

```d
Rect createRect(int x:, int y:, int width:, int height:);
createRect(0, 0, 200, 200);
```

The above code would compile since it's still perfectly fine to call a
function declared with named parameters using the standard calling
syntax.

```d
createRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 200, height: 200);
```

The above is an example of calling the same function with named
parameters.

Mixing named and regular parameters:

```d
createRect(0, 0, width: 200, height: 200);
```

Using symbols with the same parameter names is legal:

```d
createRect(x: x, y: y, width: width, height: height);
```

Changing the order when using the named parameter syntax is not legal:

```d
createRect(width: 200, height: 200, x: 0, y: 0); // error
```

Mixing regular and named parameters when declaring a function:

```d
void sendRequest(Request req, bool log:);
```

Calling the above function:

```d
sendRequest(req, log: true);
```

Compiles as expected.

```d
sendRequest(req: req, log: true);
```

The above would be an error since the "req" parameter is not declared as
a named parameter.

Named parameters combined with default values:

```d
void foo(int a: = 3, int b: = 4);
foo();
foo(a: 5, b: 6);
foo(b: 6); // this is not allowed since it's not legal to reorder the arguments
```

Templates with named parameters:

```d
struct Array(ElementType:) {}
Array!(ElementType: int) array;
```

```d
void sendRequest!(bool log:)(Request req);
sendRequest!(log: true)(req);
```

```d
template isInt(Type:) {}
isInt!(Type: int);
```

Template specialization with named parameter:

```d
struct Array(ElementType: : Object) {}
Array!(ElementType: Object) array;
```

Name parameters and uniform function call syntax:

```d
void sendRequest(Request req, bool log:);
req. sendRequest(log: true);
```

#### Interfacing with Objective-C

``` {.objc}
@interface NSObject
- (void)performSelector:(SEL)aSelector
             withObject:(id)anArgument
             afterDelay:(NSTimeInterval)delay;
@end
```

Bindings for the above Objective-C method could look like:

```d
extern(Objective-C) interface NSObject
{
    void performSelector(SEL aSelector, NSObject withObject:, NSTimeInterval afterDelay:) @selector("performSelector:withObject:afterDelay:");
}
```

Which then can be called exactly as in Swift:

```d
obj.performSelector("foo:", withObject: obj2, afterDelay: 3);
```

Breakage
--------

No code is expected to break since all changes are additive. This is
enforced by requiring the colons when declaring a function and not
allowing to change the order of the arguments when calling a function
with named parameters.

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
