---
layout: dip
nr: 9
title: ' Redo toString API'
version: 2
status: Draft
created: 2010-11-18
last-modified: 2010-11-19
author: Steven Schveighoffer (schveiguy at yahoo dot com)
permalink: /DIP9
---

Abstract
--------

The current toString method on structs and classes requires creating
heap data that will likely be discarded. It also does not provide a
means to identify how the object should be formatted. This DIP proposes
to replace the toString functionality with a delegate-based writeTo
function which uses a delegate sink and a format specifier to allow for
custom formatting.

Rationale
---------

Debug output is a common need when testing code or logging data.
Therefore it is natural to provide a means to convert custom aggregates
(structs or classes) into human-readable data. However, the current
mechanism (toString) requires returning an immutable string. Since the
object in question may mutate later, it might not be able to cache the
result. This means every time an object is printed, a new heap
allocation is required.

In addition, printing an object may require a significant amount of
string space (imagine a 10000 element container), which after passed to
an output stream will most likely just be discarded. If an aggregate
contains data that is also custom aggregates, the only available
solution is to use the result of those aggregates' toString concatenated
together. This means more wasted heap allocations.

Finally, there is no mechanism to hook the formatting specifiers for
format and writef/writefln. This is essential for numeric types such as
BigInt and BigFloat which should behave just like a builtin integer or
floating point.

Description
-----------

Replace toString on structs and classes with a new function signature:

```d
void writeTo(scope void delegate(in char[] data) sink, string format = null) const
```

**sink** is a delegate that can be called in order to write data to an
appropriate location (stream, array, etc) with a local buffer. The type
of sink's argument is 'in', meaning it will not be changed, and it will
not be stored. It is encouraged to use a stack buffer where possible.
It's also expected that the sink function will handle any buffering
necessary, so there is no need to try and buffer locally.

**format** is a string that instructs *writeTo* how to format the data.
When coming from another function such as *writefln*, the percent
symbol, as well as any arguments that are specific to that function
(such as position parameters) will be omitted. Any types that mimic
builtin types should support those builtin types' format specifiers. For
instance BigInt should support "d" and "x" and associated specifier
fields. writefln and similar functions will simply pass the
field-specific portion of the specifier to the type, so no added support
for conforming specifiers is necessary in those functions to support new
custom format specifiers. However, the format specifiers should obey the
grammar for format specifiers (see documentation for
[formattedWrite](http://www.digitalmars.com/d/2.0/phobos/std_format.html#formattedWrite))

The compiler will change its requirement for *toString* on structs.
Currently, if a struct defines *toString*, a function pointer to that
function is placed in the `{TypeInfo` `Struct}` member *xtoString* for
that struct type. Since *toString* is no longer used, it should instead
populate a new `{TypeInfo` `Struct}` member *xwriteTo* function pointer
with appropriate signature.

As a path for deprecation, the compiler should populate both *xtoString*
and *xwriteTo* as defined in the struct. The runtime should use
*xwriteTo* if defined, and *xtoString* if not. After an appropriate time
period (6 months?) the compiler should print a message when *toString*
is defined and *writeTo* is not. Then after another appropriate time
period, the compiler/runtime should stop using *toString* and member
*xtoString* altogether.

Along the same lines, the default *Object.writeTo* should simply call
*toString* and output the result to the sink. After an initial wait
period, *toString* should be deprecated, and after a transition period,
*toString* should be removed, and the default *writeTo* should perform a
similar action that the default *toString* does now (print the object
type name). Note that a cast will be required in order for the const
*writeTo* function to call the non-const *toString*.

In order to facilitate generic programming, use *formatValue* and
*formattedWrite* from std.format. We will ensure that these functions
are reentrant.

Why no templated chars?
-----------------------

You may ask, why can't this solution support multiple types of character
widths?

The problem is that templates are not virtual functions, so
Object.writeTo cannot be a template. The same goes for the compiler's
ability to save the function pointer to a member.

Note that this does not prevent you from making writeTo a template, or
from declaring a template that writeTo calls.

Examples
--------

An example of how *toString* and *writeTo* may look on a Pair struct:

```d
import std.format;
struct Pair(T, U)
{
   T first;
   U second;
   string toString()
   {
       return format("(%s, %s)", first, second);
   }

   void writeTo(scope delegate(in char[] data) sink, string format = null) const
   {
      formattedWrite(sink, "(%s, %s)", first, second);
   }
}
```

Copyright
---------

This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
