{| class="wikitable"
!Title:	
!'''C API headers'''
|-
|DIP:	
|12
|-
|Version:
|1
|-
|Status:
|Approved
|-
|Created:
|2011-10-18
|-
|Last Modified:
|2011-10-18
|-
|Author:
|Martin Nowak
|-
|Links:
|[http://lists.puremagic.com/pipermail/digitalmars-d/2011-October/112547.html The CAPI Manifesto]
|}

== Abstract ==
Create a place to gather D import files for publicly available C libraries.

== Rationale ==
D is binary compatible with C ABI code. This allows to reuse the huge amount of high quality public C libraries. Providing a central place to publish D import files can leverage the tedious work of translating.

== Description ==
A repository was created under [https://github.com/D-Programming-Language/deimos]. It was proposed to use the following directory structure.

    deimos
    
        |--- library name
            |--- C
               |--- foo.h
                   |--- bar
                       |--- baz.h
            |--- D
               |--- foo.d
                   |--- bar
                       |--- baz.d


Each '#include <path/to/header.h>' should have a corresponding 'import path.to.header;'

Possibly all files could be rooted under a package 'cabi', i.e. 'import cabi.path.to.header;'.

The D import files should try to do as least modifications as possible to simplify updates of the C headers. This includes leaving comments intact.

Translated header should not require linkage of any D binary. Necessary D functions can be written as nullary templates.

    #define GET(x) x.value => int GET()(X x) { return x.value; }

Version tags should match the ones being used by the C headers.

The copyright for the D import files should match the one being used by the C header as they are derived work.

If the C header file has a name that is a D keyword, an underscore will be appended to the D module name.

If a C type name matches a C function name (stat), the type name will have a "_t" appended.

== Open Questions ==

* Who is going to maintain the repository?

Starting with the phobos dev team.

* How will added/modified headers be reviewed/tested?

* What can be reused of the dsource/bindings project?

== Recommendations ==

Each library should contain a README in the root folder. The README file should contain exact source and version of the C library. Furthermore it should contain specific notes about the usage of the D import file.

Every library should contain a simple D example under CAPI/library/examples. This could be used for basic self testing.

== Copyright ==
This document has been placed in the Public Domain.
[[Category: DIP]]