{| class="wikitable"
!Title:	
!'''Annotations'''
|-
|DIP:	
|6
|-
|Version:
|2
|-
|Status:
|'''Approved'''
|-
|Created:
|2009-08-01
|-
|Last Modified:
|2009-08-21
|-
|Author:
|Ary Borenszweig <ary
|-
|Links:
|[[DIP6/Archive]] — [http://prowiki.org/wiki4d/wiki.cgi?LanguageDevel/DIPs/DIP6 Original Prowiki Page]
|-
|Supercedes:
|[[DIP4|DIP4 (Properties)]]
|}

<div style="padding: 1ex 1ex; background: #ffd;">Note: This page should be reviewed and updated to reflect the actual syntax used for annotations. This page has already been archived and the version increased.</div>

== Abstract ==
Extend the D programming language with annotations. Annotations are metadata attached to declarations and variables that can later be queried at compile-time or runtime. This metadata can't otherwise be expressed except by using boilerplate code or separate files that explicitly state which declaration have which metadata, but the process is ad-hoc and not standarized. 

Annotations already exist in other languages:

Java: http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.5.0/docs/guide/language/annotations.html

C# (named "atrributes"): http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa287992(VS.71).aspx

== Rationale ==
Annotations will allow several things: reduce the amount of keywords and extend the language more easily.

By reducing the ammount of keywords programmers can use more declarative names for their variables. It also reduces lexer and parser changes when upgrading the language.

The language can be extended more easily just by adding new annotation names instead of new keywords: new keywords might render old code not compilable, while with new annotations that can never happen.

General-purpose attributes allow many other things: specify how serialization should be done, how a field should be stored in a database, how a method maps to an http request, whether a method should do security checks before executing, whether a method should run as a test and what's the thrown exception is.

== Description ==
The idea is to introduce annotations in the D language. As a first stage, users won't be able to define annotations: some well-known annotations will exist and that's it.

Proposed syntax: @annotation(arguments). This is what Java uses. Other syntax can be [annotation(arguments)]. This is what C# uses. Java's syntax has the advantage of having to type less when the annotation has no arguments: @annotation vs. [annotation].

It can be applied to declarations:
<syntaxhighlight lang="d">
@annotation
int x;

@annotation
class Foo { }
</syntaxhighlight>

== Usage ==
Annotations could be used for several things now. For example:
<syntaxhighlight lang="d">
@align(1)
struct Foo { }

@extern('C')
int foo();

@pure
int foo() { }

@nothrow
int foo() { }

@shared
int x;

@__gshared
int x;

@__thread
int x;

@final
class Foo { }

@abstract
class Foo { }

class Foo {

  @deprecated
  void foo() { }
}

class Foo {

  @override
  void foo() { }
}
</syntaxhighlight>

And also for new things:

<syntaxhighlight lang="d">
class Foo {

  @property
  int x() { ... }

  @property
  int x(int value) { ... }

}
</syntaxhighlight>

== Compiler Implementation ==
At a first stange, the compiler will parse the annotations and attach them to declarations. In the semantic pass the annotations are inspected and actions are taken. For example if the @override property is found in a function, a check is made to see if it indeed overrides a base function. If @deprecated is found and deprecated features are not allowed, a warning/error is issued.
 
If the annotation is not recognized by the compiler, an error happens (much like what happens with __traits(somehthing, foo) now: if the first argument is not recognized, it is an error). Also at this first stage, a user cannot define new annotations. A user cannot inspect annotations. The first stage will just help introducing annotations, making the language easier to evolve (no need to introduce new keywords for every new functionality). A future DIP should define how annotations evolve from this point once they have been implemented.

== Copyright ==
This document has been placed in the Public Domain.

[[Category: DIP]]